man  (ha  hunter 

the  first  intensivesurveyof  a single,  crucial  stage  of 
human  development— man's  once  universal  hunting  way  of  life. 


MAN  THE  HUNTER 


Hunters  of  the  World 


10,000  B.C. 

World  Population:  io  million 
Per  Cent  Hunters:  ioo 


I5OO  A.D. 

World  Population:  350  million 
Per  Cent  Hunters : 1 .0 


1972  A.D 

World  Population:  3 billion 
Per  Cent  Hunters:  0.001 


MAN  THE  HUNTER 


Edited  by 
Richard  Lee 
and 

Irven  DeVore 
with  the  assistance  of 
Jill  Nash-Mitchell 


ALDINE  DE  GRUYTER  / New  York 


Copyright©  1968  by  the  Wenner-Gren  Foundation  for 
Anthropological  Research,  Inc. 

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  publication  may  be 
reproduced  or  transmitted  in  any  form  or  by  any  means, 
electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopy,  recording, 
or  any  information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without 
permission  in  writing  from  the  publisher. 

ALDINE  DE  GRUYTER 
A Division  of  Walter  de  Gruyter,  Inc. 

200  Saw  Mill  River  Road 
Hawthorne,  N.Y.  10532 

Eleventh  printing,  1987 

ISBN  0-202-33032-X 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number  67-17603 

Designed  by  Chestnut  House 

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


To  Claude  Levi-Strauss 


Preface 


In  November,  1965,  Sol  Tax  asked  us  to  organ- 
ize a symposium  on  current  research  among 
the  hunting  and  gathering  peoples  of  the  world. 
This  meeting  was  conceived  to  follow  logically 
from  an  earlier  symposium  on  the  Origin  of 
Man  held  at  the  U niversity  of  Chicago  in  April, 
1965.  There  were  a number  of  reasons  why  we 
felt  a conference  devoted  exclusively  to  the 
hunting  way  of  life  would  be  appropriate  at 
this  time.  Current  ethnographic  studies  have 
contributed  substantial  amounts  of  new  data 
on  hunter-gatherers  and  are  rapidly  changing 
our  concept  of  Man  the  Hunter.  Social  anthro- 
pologists generally  have  been  reappraising  the 
basic  concepts  of  descent,  filiation,  residence, 
and  group  structure.  In  archeology  the  recent 
excavation  of  early  living  floors  has  led  to  a re- 
newed interest  in  and  reliance  on  hunter- 
gatherer  data  for  reconstruction,  and  current 
theories  of  society  and  social  evolution  must  in- 
evitably take  into  account  these  new  data  on 
the  hunter-gatherer  groups.  Finally,  hunting 
and  gathering,  as  a way  of  life,  is  rapidly  disap- 
pearing and  it  was  hoped  that  the  symposium 
would  serve  to  stimulate  further  research  while 
there  were  still  viable  groups  to  study. 

It  was  clear,  however,  that  the  first  order  of 
business  was  to  present  the  new  data  on  hunters 
and  to  clarify  a series  of  conceptual  issues 
among  social  anthropologists  as  a necessary 
background  to  broader  discussions  with  arche- 
ologists, biologists,  and  students  of  human 
evolution.  A preliminary  canvass  was  made  in 
January,  1966,  of  seventeen  younger  anthro- 
pologists who  had  recently  completed  field 
work  among  hunting  peoples,  and  their  en- 


thusiastic response  led  us  to  contact  an  addi- 
tional fifty  scientists  in  social  anthropology, 
human  biology,  archeology,  demography,  and 
ecology,  particularly  those  who  in  their 
writings  had  shown  an  interest  in  hunter- 
gatherer  data  and  theory.  The  positive  res- 
ponse of  this  larger  group  insured  the  success  of 
the  symposium,  and  the  Wenner-Gren  Founda- 
tion for  Anthropological  Research  generously 
agreed  to  sponsor  the  meeting  and  to  cover  tra- 
veling and  living  expenses  for  the  participants. 

The  symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter  was 
held  at  the  Center  for  Continuing  Education  at 
the  University  of  Chicago,  April  6-9,  1966.  In 
attendance  were  some  75  scholars  from  as 
far  afield  as  India,  Japan,  Australia,  Uganda, 
Kenya,  and  the  German  Democratic  Re- 
public, as  well  as  from  centers  in  France, 
England,  Canada,  Latin  America,  and  the 
United  States.  In  an  intensive  four-day  meet- 
ing, those  present  heard  28  background 
papers  and  twelve  formal  discussions,  and  par- 
ticipated in  over  ten  hours  of  open  debate. 
Since  most  of  the  papers  had  been  distributed 
in  advance,  it  was  possible  to  limit  formal 
presentations  to  ten  minutes  each  in  order  to 
leave  time  for  discussion.  Our  impression  is 
that  most  participants  found  this  intensive  for- 
mat exhausting  but  rewarding. 

With  three  exceptions,  all  of  the  original 
papers  presented  at  the  symposium  are  pub- 
lished here.  The  majority  have  been  substan- 
tially revised  in  the  light  of  our  discussions  in 
Chicago.  In  addition,  two  new  papers,  one  by 
Yengoyan  and  the  other  by  Washburn  and 
Lancaster,  are  included  in  the  book  although 


viii  Preface 

they  were  not  presented  at  the  meeting. 

The  format  of  this  book  follows  closely  that 
of  the  symposium.  The  introductory  section 
contains  a general  statement  by  the  editors  of 
the  problems  and  issues  to  be  discussed  and  an 
inventory  by  Professor  G.  P.  Murdock  of  the 
current  status  of  the  world’s  hunting  and 
gathering  peoples.  Each  of  the  remaining  sec- 
tions corresponds  to  one  of  the  topical  sessions 
of  the  symposium,  and  each  section  contains 
the  relevant  papers  as  well  as  the  edited 
transcript  of  the  symposium  discussion.  As 
editors  we  are  aware  that  publishing  verbatim 
material  from  symposia  does  not  always  work 
out  successfully;  we  hope  that  our  attempt  at 
editing  has  eliminated  redundancy  and  in- 
consequential material  while  still  conveying 
some  of  the  excitement  and  the  confrontation 
of  different  viewpoints  that  characterized  the 
symposium  itself. 

On  behalf  of  all  the  participants  we  want  to 
thank  the  Wenner-Gren  Foundation  for  An- 
thropological Research  for  providing  the 
financial  support  that  made  possible  the 
symposium  and  the  preparation  of  this  volume. 
Mrs.  Lita  Osmundsen  and  the  excellent  staff  of 
the  Foundation  in  New  York  solved  the  com- 
plex problems  of  travel,  visas,  and  financing 
with  their  usual  efficient  dispatch,  enabling  all 
of  us  to  converge  miraculously  on  Chicago  on 
the  appointed  day. 

Sol  Tax  conceived  the  idea  of  a symposium 
on  Man  the  Hunter  and  brought  it  to  fruition. 
As  chairman  of  the  meetings  he  brought  us  to- 
gether on  time  and  skillfully  kept  speakers 
within  their  time  limits;  on  behalf  of  a group 
of  anthropologists  who  had  a great  deal  to 
say,  we  offer  Sol  our  affectionate  resentment. 
The  staff  of  Current  Anthropology  worked  to  dis- 
tribute advance  papers,  to  compile  accurate 
transcripts  and  address  lists,  and  generally  to 
keep  the  symposium  running  smoothly. 

Our  thanks  go  as  well  to  Lee  Pravatiner  and 
the  staff  of  the  Center  for  Continuing  Educa- 
tion. With  accommodations,  food  service, 
press,  duplicating  facilities,  and  meeting  rooms 
all  under  one  roof,  the  Center  was  an  ideal 
place  for  a symposium  of  this  size  and  com- 
plexity. Few  of  the  participants  realized  the 
contribution  that  Mr.  Pravatiner  made  to  the 
success  of  the  meeting;  he  attended  to  countless 
details  of  seating  arrangements,  reservations, 


messages,  transcription,  and  mimeographing, 
and  did  so  tactfully  and  unobtrusively.  Person- 
ally we  were  struck  by  the  contrast  between  the 
complex  social  and  technological  system  that 
enabled  us  to  meet  and  the  much  simpler 
systems  of  the  hunting  and  gathering  peoples 
we  were  discussing. 

In  addition  we  should  mention  the  pleasant 
evening  that  many  of  us  spent  at  the  American 
Indian  Center  in  north  Chicago.  Our  thanks 
go  to  members  of  the  Center  and  to  its  director 
Robert  Rietz,  for  their  hospitality. 

The  transcription  and  editing  of  the  twenty 
hours  of  tapes  from  the  sessions  proved  to  be  a 
formidable  job ; we  are  particularly  grateful  to 
Paul  L.  DeVore  of  the  University  of  Chicago 
for  the  180  pages  of  transcription  and  to  Jill 
Nash  of  Harvard  University  for  her  aid  in 
editing  the  transcript  and  for  many  other 
editorial  services.  Miss  Nash  also  r«ad 
through  the  entire  manuscript  and  made  many 
helpful  suggestions  which  have  been  incorpor- 
ated in  the  final  version.  Dr.  David  A.  Horr  of 
Harvard  undertook  the  compilation  of  the 
references  and  handled  many  editorial  details 
in  the  latter  half  of  the  book. 

The  drawings  were  executed  by  Judith 
Tempkin  and  Jane  Britton;  the  former  also 
assisted  in  the  final  preparation  of  the  bibliog- 
raphy. Mrs.  Marcia  Harding  Anderson,  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Burnham,  and  Mrs.  Linda  Moseley, 
all  of  the  staff  of  the  Department  of  Social 
Relations  of  Harvard  University,  typed  por- 
tions of  the  manuscript;  the  final  version  was 
produced  by  Mrs.  Nellie  Miller. 

Richard  Lee  offers  a special  vote  of  thanks  to 
the  students  in  Social  Relations  251  and  252, 
graduate  seminars  at  Harvard  in  the  spring 
semesters  of  1966  and  1967,  respectively.  The 
members  of  these  seminars  read  most  of  the 
preliminary  manuscripts  and  their  lively  dis- 
cussions did  much  to  clarify  the  core  issues 
presented  in  the  book. 

Both  of  us  wish  to  thank  our  colleagues  in 
the  Department  of  Social  Relations  at  Har- 
vard for  providing  a congenial  intellectual 
atmosphere  and  for  making  a number  of  useful 
suggestions  on  specific  portions  of  the  manu- 
script; we  appreciate  particularly  the  help  of 
John  W.  M.  Whiting,  A.  Kimball  Romney, 
Evon  Z.  Vogt  and  David  H.  P.  Maybury- 
Lewis.  We  also  want  to  thank  our  publisher, 


Alexander  J.  Morin,  for  his  patience  and  for- 
bearance while  we  labored  to  complete  the 
manuscript  before  our  departure  for  further 
field  work  among  the  Bushmen. 

Finally  we  acknowledge  our  major  debt  to 
our  contributors,  many  of  whom  are  hunter- 
gatherers  in  spirit  as  well  as  in  professional 
interest.  No  two  anthropological  field  workers 
share  exactly  the  same  motivations  and  world- 
view, except  perhaps  a common  interest  in 


Preface  ix 

understanding  the  human  condition.  We  can- 
not avoid  the  suspicion  that  many  of  us  were 
led  to  live  and  work  among  the  hunters  be- 
cause of  a feeling  that  the  human  condition 
was  likely  to  be  more  clearly  drawn  here  than 
among  other  kinds  of  societies. 

Richard  B.  Lee 
Irven  DeVore 


Contents 


Part  I : Introduction 

1.  Problems  in  the  Study  of  Hunters  and  Gatherers,  Richard  B.  Lee  and  Irven 
DeVore  3 

2.  The  Current  Status  of  the  World’s  Hunting  and  Gathering  Peoples,  George 
Peter  Murdock  1 3 


Part  II : Ecology  and  Economics 

3.  The  “Hunting”  Economies  of  the  Tropical  Forest  Zone  of  South  America: 
An  Attempt  at  Historical  Perspective,  Donald  W.  Lathrap  23 

4.  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  To  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources, 
Richard  B.  Lee  30 

5.  An  Introduction  to  Hadza  Ecology,  James  Woodbum  49 

6.  Coping  with  Abundance : Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast,  Wayne  Suttles 

56 

7.  Subsistence  and  Ecology  of  Northern  Food  Gatherers  with  Special  Reference 
to  the  Ainu,  Hitoshi  Watanabe  69 

8.  The  Netsilik  Eskimos:  Adaptive  Processes,  Asen  Balikci  78 

9.  Discussions,  Part  II 

a.  The  Central  Eskimo:  A Marginal  Case?  83 

b.  Notes  on  the  Original  Affluent  Society  85 

c.  Does  Hunting  Bring  Happiness?  89 

d.  Hunting  vs.  Gathering  as  Factors  in  Subsistence  92 

e.  Measuring  Resources  and  Subsistence  Strategy  94 


Part  III:  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

10.  Ownership  and  Use  of  Land  among  the  Australian  Aborigines,  L.  R.  Hiatt  99 

11.  Stability  and  Flexibility  in  Hadza  Residential  Groupings,  James  Woodbum 
103 

12.  The  Diversity  of  Eskimo  Societies,  David  Daijias  1 1 1 


Contents 


13.  The  Nature  of  Dcgrib  Socioterritorial  Groups,  June  Helm  1 18 

14.  The  Birhor  of  India  and  Some  Comments  on  Band  Organization,  B.  J. 
Williams  1 26 

15.  The  Importance  of  Flux  in  Two  Hunting  Societies,  Colin  M.  Turnbull  132 

16.  Southeastern  Australia:  Level  of  Social  Organization,  Arnold  R.  Pilling  138 

17.  Discussions,  Part  III 

a.  On  Ethnographic  Reconstruction  146 

b.  The  Problem  of  Lineage  Organization  149 

c.  Analysis  of  Group  Composition  150 

d.  Social  Determinants  of  Group  Size  155 

e.  Resolving  Conflicts  by  Fission  156 

f.  Territorial  Boundaries  156 

g.  Predation  and  Warfare  157 

h.  Hunter  Social  Organization:  Some  Problems  of  Method  159 

i.  Typology  and  Reconstruction:  A Shoshoni  Example  16 1 


Part  IV : Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

18.  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements,  L.  R.  Hiatt  165 

19.  “Marriage  Classes”  and  Demography  in  Central  Australia,  M.  J.  Meggitt 
176 

20.  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage 
Sections,  Aram  A.  Yengoyan  185 

21.  Australian  Marriage,  Land-Owning  Groups,  and  Initiations,  Frederick  G.  G. 
Rose  200 

22.  Discussions,  Part  IV 

a.  Gerontocracy  and  Polygyny  209 

b.  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements : Comments  and  Rejoinder  2 1 o 

c.  The  Use  and  Misuse  of  Models  2 1 2 

d.  The  Statistics  of  Kin  Marriage:  A Non-Australian  Example  216 


Part  V : Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

23.  Epidemiological  Factors:  Health  and  Disease  in  Hunter-Gatherers,  Frederick 
L.  Dunn  221 

24.  Some  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene  Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among 
Recent  Hunter-Gatherers,  Joseph  B.  Birdsell  229 

25.  Discussions,  Part  V 

a.  The  Demography  of  Hunters:  An  Eskimo  Example  241 

b.  Population  Control  Factors:  Infanticide,  Disease,  Nutrition,  and  Food 
Supply  243 

c.  The  Magic  Numbers  “25”  and  “500”:  Determinants  of  Group  Size  in 
Modern  and  Pleistocene  Hunters  245 

d.  Pleistocene  Family  Planning  248 


Contents 


xiii 

Part  VI : Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

26.  Traces  of  Pleistocene  Hunters:  An  East  African  Example,  Glynn  L.  Isaac  253 

27.  A Theoretical  Framework  for  Interpreting  Archeological  Materials,  L.  G. 

Freeman,  Jr.  262 

28.  Methodological  Considerations  of  the  Archeological  Use  of  Ethnographic 
Data,  Lewis  R.  Binford  268 

29.  Ethnographic  Data  and  Understanding  the  Pleistocene,  Sally  R.  Binford  274 

30.  Studies  of  Hunter-Gatherers  as  an  Aid  to  the  Interpretation  of  Prehistoric 
Societies,  J.  Desmond  Clark  276 

31.  Discussions,  Part  VI 

a.  Hunters  in  Archeological  Perspective  281 

b.  The  Archeological  Visibility  of  Food  Gatherers  285 

c.  The  Use  of  Ethnography  in  Reconstructing  the  Past  287 


Part  VII : Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

32.  The  Evolution  of  Hunting,  Sherwood  L.  Washburn  and  C.  S.  Lancaster  293 

33.  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Impor- 
tance, William  S.  Laughlir.  304 

34.  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies, 
Julian  H.  Steward  321 

35.  Discussions,  Part  VII 

a.  Are  the  Hunter-Gatherers  a Cultural  Type?  335 

b.  Primate  Behavior  and  the  Evolution  of  Aggression  338 

c.  Future  Agenda  344 


Part  VIII:  The  Concept  of  Primitiveness 

36.  The  Concept  of  Primitiveness,  Claude  Levi-Strauss  349 

References  353 

Index  393 


Wenn'er-Gren  Foundation  for  Anthropological  Research 


Symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter 


Participants 

Sol  Tax,  Chairman 
University  of  Chicago 

Alexander  A.  Alland 
Columbia  University 

James  N.  Anderson 
University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Asen  Balikci 
University  de  Montreal 

Marco  Bicchieri 

Central  Washington  State  College 

Lewis  R.  Binford 

University  of  New  Mexico 

Sally  R.  Binford 
Los  Angeles , California 

Joseph  B.  Birdsell 

University  of  California,  Los  Angeles 
Jean  Briggs 

Memorial  University  of  Newfoundland 

Ralph  Bulmer 
University  of  Auckland 

Napoleon  A.  Chagnon 

Pennsylvania  State  University 


J.  Desmond  Clark 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Georges  Condominas 

ficole  Pratique  des  Hautes  fitudes,  Paris 

William  Crocker 
Smithsonian  Institution 

Ralph  Crocombe 
Australian  National  University 

David  Damas 

McMaster  University 

James  Deetz 
Brown  University 

Edward  Deevey,  Jr. 

Dalhousie  Lfniversity 

P.  E.  de  Josselin  dejong 
Leiden  University 

Irven  DeVore 
Harvard  University 

A.  Jorge  Dias 
Lisbon 


xiv 


Frederick  L.  Dunn 

Hooper  Foundation 

University  of  California,  San  Francisco 

Fred  Eggan 
University  of  Chicago 

Leslie  G.  Freeman,  Jr. 

University  of  Chicago 

Peter  M.  Gardner 
University  of  Texas 

David  M.  Hamburg 
Stanford  University 

June  Helm 
University  of  Iowa 

L.  R.  Hiatt 
University  of  Sydney 

F.  Clark  Howell 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Glynn  L.  Isaac 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Irawati  Karv6 
University  of  Poona 

C.  S.  Lancaster 

Rutgers  University 

Donald  W.  Lathrap 
University  of  Illinois 

William  S.  Laughlin 

University  of  Connecticut 

Duhyan  Lee 

Seoul  National  University 

Richard  B.  Lee 

University  of  Toronto 

Claude  Ldvi-Strauss 
College  de  France 

Toichi  Mabuchi 

Tokyo  Metropolitan  University 

Loma  Marshall 
Cambridge,  Mass. 

M.  J.  Meggitt 

City  University  of  New  York 

George  Peter  Murdock 
University  of  Pittsburgh 

Chie  Nakane 
University  of  Tokyo 


Symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter 

Roger  C.  Owen 

City  University  of  New  York 

Angel  Palerm 

Pan  American  Union,  Mexico 

Arnold  R.  Pilling 
Wayne  State  University 

Merrick  Posnansky 

University  of  Ghana 

Edward  S.  Rogers 

Royal  Ontario  Museum,  Toronto 

Frederick  G.  G.  Rose 
Institut  fur  Volkerkunde,  Berlin 

James  R.  Sackett 

University  of  California,  Los  Angeles 

Marshall  D.  Sahlins 
University  of  Michigan 

Edward  Schieffelin 
University  of  Chicago 

David  M.  Schneider 
University  of  Chicago 

William  Shack 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Lauriston  Sharp 
Cornell  University 

Surajit  Sinha 

Indian  Institute  of  Management,  Calcutta 

Richard  Slobodin 
McMaster  University 

Julian  H.  Steward 
University  of  Illinois 

Stuart  Struever 
Northwestern  University 

Wayne  Suttles 
Portland  State  College 

Reina  Torres  de  Arauz 
Universidad  de  Panama 

Colin  M.  Turnbull 

Hofstra  University 

Sherwood  L.  Washburn 
University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Hitoshi  Watanabe 
University  of  Tokyo 


XV 


xvi  Symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter 

John  W.  M.  Whiting 
Harvard  University 

B.  J.  Williams 

University  of  California,  Los  Angeles 


James  Wood  burn 
London  School  of  Economics 

Aram  A.  Yengoyan 
University  of  Michigan 


Part  I 


Introduction 


I 


Problems  in  the  Study 
of  Hunters  and  Gatherers 


RICHARD  B.  LEE  AND  IRVEN  DEVORE 


Cultural  Man  has  been  on  earth  for  some 
2,000,000  years;  for  over  99  per  cent  of  this 
period  he  has  lived  as  a hunter-gatherer.  Only 
in  the  last  10,000  years  has  man  begun  to 
domesticate  plants  and  animals,  to  use  metals, 
and  to  harness  energy  sources  other  than  the 
human  body.  Homo  sapiens  assumed  an  essen- 
tially modern  form  at  least  50,000  years  before 
he  managed  to  do  anything  about  improving 
his  means  of  production.  Of  the  estimated 
150  billion  men  who  have  ever  lived  on  earth, 
over  60  per  cent  have  lived  as  hunters  and 
gatherers;  about  35  per  cent  have  lived  by 
agriculture  and  the  remaining  few  per  cent 
have  lived  in  industrial  societies. 

To  date,  the  hunting  way  of  life  has  been  the 
most  successful  and  persistent  adaptation  man 
has  ever  achieved.  Nor  does  this  evaluation 
exclude  the  present  precarious  existence  under 
the  threat  of  nuclear  annihilation  and  the 
population  explosion.  It  is  still  an  open  ques- 
tion whether  man  will  be  able  to  survive  the 
exceedingly  complex  and  unstable  ecological 
conditions  he  has  created  for  himself.  If  he  fails 
in  this  task,  interplanetary  archeologists  of  the 
future  will  classify  our  planet  as  one  in  which  a 
very  long  and  stable  period  of  small-scale  hunt- 
ing and  gathering  was  followed  by  an  appar- 
ently instantaneous  efflorescence  of  technology 
and  society  leading  rapidly  to  extinction. 


“Stratigraphically,”  the  origin  of  agriculture 
and  thermonuclear  destruction  will  appear  as 
essentially  simultaneous. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  succeed  in  es- 
tablishing a sane  and  workable  world  order, 
the  long  evolution  of  man  as  a hunter  in  the 
past  and  the  (hopefully)  much  longer  era  of 
technical  civilization  in  the  future  will  bracket 
an  incredibly  brief  transitional  phase  of  human 
history — a phase  which  included  the  rise  of 
agriculture,  animal  domestication,  tribes, 
states,  cities,  empires,  nations,  and  the  in- 
dustrial revolution.  These  transitional  stages 
are  what  cultural  and  social  anthropologists 
have  chosen  as  their  particular  sphere  of  study. 
We  devote  almost  all  of  our  professional  atten- 
tion to  organizational  forms  that  have  emerged 
within  the  last  10,000  years  and  that  are 
rapidly  disappearing  in  the  face  of  moderniza- 
tion. 

It  is  appropriate  that  anthropologists  take 
stock  of  the  much  older  way  of  life  of  the 
hunters.  This  is  not  simply  a study  of  biological 
evolution,  since  zoologists  have  come  to  regard 
behavior  as  central  to  the  adaptation  and  evo- 
lution of  all  species.  The  emergence  of  eco- 
nomic, social,  and  ideological  forms  are  as 
much  a part  of  human  evolution  as  are  the  de- 
velopments in  human  anatomy  and  physiology. 

The  time  is  rapidly  approaching  when  there 


3 


4 


Introduction 


will  be  no  hunters  left  to  study.  Our  aim  in  con- 
vening the  symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter  was 
to  bring  together  those  who  had  recently  done 
field  work  among  the  surviving  hunters  with 
other  anthropologists,  archeologists,  and  evo- 
lutionists who  are  interested  in  the  results  of 
these  studies.  But  it  was  also  clear  that  there 
were  a series  of  issues  among  social  anthro- 
pologists that  required  clarification  before  a 
dialogue  with  others  could  become  meaning- 
ful. Therefore,  the  first  half  of  this  book  is  de- 
voted to  the  presentation  of  new  data  on 
contemporary  hunters,  along  with  discussion 
and  evaluation  of  current  issues.  The  later 
chapters  consider  the  relevance  of  these  data 
to  the  reconstruction  of  life  in  the  past. 

A number  of  divergent  viewpoints  are  repre- 
sented in  this  volume  and  many  of  the  issues 
to  be  raised  remain  unsolved.  As  both  editors 
and  partisans,  it  is  our  task  to  point  out  areas 
of  general  agreement  while  trying  to  avoid 
glossing  over  real  differences  where  they  occur. 
Considering  the  many  points  of  view  presented 
at  the  symposium,  it  would  be  impossible  to 
touch  on  all  of  the  interesting  material.  We 
make  no  apologies  for  our  selection  but  offer  it 
as  a partial  guide  to  the  papers  and  discussions. 

Defining  Hunters 

The  symposium  considered  the  definition  of 
“hunters”  but  did  not  succeed  in  satisfying 
everyone.  An  evolutionary  definition  would 
have  been  ideal;  this  would  confine  hunters  to 
those  populations  with  strictly  Pleistocene 
economies — no  metal,  firearms,  dogs,  or  con- 
tact with  non-hunting  cultures.  Unfortunately 
such  a definition  would  effectively  eliminate 
most,  if  not  all,  of  the  peoples  reported  at  the 
symposium  since,  as  Marshall  Sahlins  pointed 
out,  nowhere  today  do  we  find  hunters  living 
in  a world  of  hunters. 

Murdock  (Chapter  2,  this  volume)  and 
others  took  an  organizational  view  which 
equated  hunting  and  gathering  with  the 
“band”  level  of  social  organization.  However, 
not  all  hunters  live  in  bands.  Suttles,  for  ex- 
ample (Chapter  6),  documents  the  quite  sub- 
stantial non-agricultural  tribal  societies  of  the 
Northwest  coast  of  North  America.  Judging 
from  recent  archeological  evidence  from  the 


Paleolithic  of  France  and  of  European  Russia, 
a number  of  ancient  hunting  societies  may  have 
operated  on  a similar  scale. 

A further  consideration  was  introduced  by 
Lathrap  (Chapter  3)  and  others  who  cited  a 
number  of  hunting  peoples  who  were  “failed” 
agriculturalists.  This  readaptation  to  hunting,  or 
“devolution”  as  it  has  been  called,  character- 
ized such  classic  “hunters”  as  the  Siriono  of 
South  America  and  the  Veddas  of  Cevlon. 

It  was  clear  that  there  was  much  to  be 
learned  even  from  the  ambiguous  cases  of 
tribal  hunters,  “devolved”  hunters,  and  re- 
formed hunters.  To  throw  out  impure  cases 
was  to  lose  the  chance  of  gaining  any  signifi- 
cant understanding  of  modes  of  adaptation, 
group  structure,  social  control,  and  settlement 
patterns.  The  symposium  agreed  to  consider 
as  hunters  all  cases  presented,  at  least  in  the 
first  instance.  It  was  also  generally  agreed  to 
use  the  term  “hunters”  as  a convenient  short- 
hand, despite  the  fact  that  the  majority  of 
peoples  considered  subsisted  primarily  on 
sources  other  than  meat — mainly  wild  plants  and 
fish. 


The  Representativeness 
of  Our  Sample  of  Hunters 

There  has  been  a burst  of  field  research  on 
hunting  peoples  in  the  last  ten  years,  and  this 
symposium  was  the  first  opportunity  to  bring 
together  this  diverse  group  of  field  workers. 

The  Australian  contingent  included  L.  R. 
Hiatt  (Arnhem  Land),  M.  J.  Meggitt  (Wal- 
biri),  Arnold  Pilling  (Tiwi),  and  Aram 
Yengoyan,  all  of  whom  have  done  field  work 
in  the  1950’s  and  1960’s,  as  well  as  Birdsell, 
Rose,  and  Sharp  whose  field  work  dates  to 
the  1930’s  and  1940’s.  Workers  from  Africa 
included  Bicchieri,  Turnbull  (Mbuti),  Wood- 
burn  (Hadza),  and  Marshall,  Lee,  and  De- 
Vore  on  the  IKung  Bushmen.  Field  work  in 
Asia  was  reported  by  Dunn,  Gardner,  Sinha, 
Watanabe,  and  Williams.  Lathrap  and  Crocker 
presented  data  on  the  part-time  hunters  of 
tropical  South  America.  The  largest  group  had 
done  field  work  in  North  America:  Balikci, 
Damas,  and  Laughlin  on  the  Eskimos;  Helm, 
Rogers,  and  Slobodin  on  subarctic  Indians; 
and  Owen  and  Suttles  on  Indians  of  the  Pacific 


Lee  and  DeVore  Problems  in  the  Study  of  Hunters  and  Gatherers 


coast.  Julian  H.  Steward,  in  many  ways  the 
founder  of  modern  hunter-gatherer  studies,  sub- 
mitted a paper,  but  was  prevented  by  illness 
from  attending  the  conference  itself. 

One  of  the  first  questions  considered  at  the 
symposium  was  whether  the  sample  currently 
available  to  ethnographers  is  representative  of 
the  range  of  habitats  which  hunters  occupied 
in  the  past.  Ever  since  the  origin  of  agriculture, 
Neolithic  peoples  have  been  steadily  expand- 
ing at  the  expense  of  the  hunters.  Today  the 
latter  are  often  found  in  unattractive  environ- 
ments, in  lands  which  are  of  no  use  to  their 
neighbors  and  which  pose  difficult  and  dramatic 
problems  of  survival.  The  more  favorable  habi- 
tats have  long  ago  been  appropriated  by  peoples 
with  stronger,  more  aggressive  social  systems. 

Taking  hunters  as  they  are  found,  anthro- 
pologists have  naturally  been  led  to  the  con- 
clusion that  their  life  (and  by  implication  the 
life  of  our  ancestors)  was  a constant  struggle 
for  survival.  The  three  maps  presented  in  the 
frontispiece  show  a radically  different  picture. 
In  10,000  B.C.,  on  the  eve  of  agriculture, 
hunters  covered  most  of  the  habitable  globe, 
and  appeared  to  be  generally  most  successful 
in  those  areas  which  later  supported  the  den- 
sest populations  of  agricultural  peoples.  By 
a.d.  1500  the  area  left  to  hunters  had  shrunk 
drastically  and  their  distribution  fell  largely  at 
the  peripheries  of  the  continents  and  in  the  in- 
accessible interiors.  However,  even  at  this  late 
date,  hunting  peoples  occupied  all  of  Australia, 
most  of  western  and  northern  North  America, 
and  large  portions  of  South  America  and 
Africa.  This  situation  rapidly  changed  with  the 
era  of  colonial  expansion,  and  by  1900,  when 
serious  ethnographic  research  got  under  way, 
much  of  this  way  of  life  had  been  destroyed.  As 
a result,  our  notion  of  unacculturated  hunter- 
gatherer  life  has  been  largely  drawn  from 
peoples  no  longer  living  in  the  optimum  por- 
tion of  their  traditional  range. 

To  mention  a few  examples,  the  Netsilik 
Eskimos,  the  Arunta,  and  the  IKung  Bushmen 
are  now  classic  cases  in  ethnography.  However, 
the  majority  of  the  precontact  Eskimos,  Aus- 
tralian aborigines,  and  Bushmen  lived  in  much 
better  environments.  Two-thirds  of  the  Eski- 
mos, according  to  Laughlin,  lived  south  of  the 
Arctic  circle,  and  the  populations  in  the  Aus- 
tralian and  Kalahari  deserts  were  but  a frac- 


5 

tion  of  the  populations  living  in  the  well- 
watered  regions  of  southeast  Australia  and  the 
Cape  Province  of  Africa.  Thus,  within  a given 
region  the  “classic  cases”  may,  in  fact,  be  pre- 
cisely the  opposite:  namely,  the  most  isolated 
peoples  who  managed  to  avoid  contact  until 
the  arrival  of  the  ethnographers.  In  order  to 
understand  hunters  better  it  may  be  more 
profitable  to  consider  the  few  hunters  in  rich 
environments,  since  it  is  likely  that  these 
peoples  will  be  more  representative  of  the  eco- 
logical conditions  under  which  man  evolved 
than  are  the  dramatic  and  unusual  cases  that 
illustrate  extreme  environmental  pressure. 
Such  a perspective  may  better  help  us  to  under- 
stand the  extraordinary  persistence  and  success 
of  the  human  adaptation. 

Ethnographic  Reconstruction 

Many  of  the  best-known  studies  of  hunter- 
gatherers  have  relied  on  ethnographic  re- 
constructions of  situations  that  were  no  longer 
intact.  In  the  early  years  of  field  anthropology, 
Kroeber  in  California,  Boas  on  the  Northwest 
coast,  and  Radcliffe-Brown  in  the  Andaman 
islands  and  Australia  compiled  the  recollec- 
tions of  older  informants  to  produce  a picture 
of  the  culture  and  society.  The  “facts”  of  the 
case  were  thought  to  include  the  verbalized 
cultural  tradition  —language,  myths,  folktales, 
and  kin  terms — and  concrete  expressions — 
rituals,  house  types,  tools,  dress,  and  religious 
objects.  As  anthropology  developed,  however, 
a different  view  emerged  about  what  consti- 
tuted the  ethnographic  facts.  More  attention 
was  paid  to  the  study  of  individuals  and  groups 
in  ongoing  social  systems.  The  interest  in 
ideology  was  retained,  but  this  was  tempered 
by  the  task  of  comparing  stated  norms  with 
observed  behavior.  When  discrepancies  between 
“real”  and  “ideal”  came  to  light,  the  ethno- 
grapher could  then  make  further  inquiries  and 
observations  and  attempt  to  explain  “how  the 
system  really  works.” 

The  shortcoming  of  the  reconstructive 
method  is  that  there  is  no  means  of  testing 
and  rechecking  hypotheses.  After  the  socio- 
economic system  ceases  to  function,  the  only 
check  available  is  the  test  of  internal  consist- 
ency, and  the  early  ethnographers  were  more 


6 


Introduction 


or  less  successful  in  constructing  models  of 
social  systems  that  were  self-consistent. 

The  controversy  on  this  question  is  very 
much  alive  in  current  social  anthropology  and 
the  issue  forms  a central  theme  in  this  volume 
(Chapters  io,  17a,  17c,  17!!,  18,  19,  22b,  and 
22c).  The  relevance  for  methodology  hinges  on 
the  question  of  how  much  of  an  ongoing  system 
can  be  reconstructed  25-50  years  after  the 
event,  solely  on  the  basis  of  informants’ accounts. 
Birdsell  and  others  take  the  pessimistic  view 
that  such  important  features  as  group  structure 
and  territorial  relations  vanish  with  contact 
(Chapter  17a).  Williams,  in  the  same  vein,  re- 
ports that  he  was  unable  to  reconstruct  the 
residence  arrangements  of  a Birhor  group 
whose  campsite  had  been  mapped  in  detail  by 
another  anthropologist  only  six  years  pre- 
viously. Woodburn  notes  that  the  Hadza  pre- 
sent themselves  as  having  a matrilineal  descent 
system,  when  in  fact  the  kinship  and  the  group 
structure  are  bilateral;  the  fiction  is  used  by 
the  Hadza  to  emulate  their  agricultural,  matri- 
lineal neighbors.  This  fact  is  significant  in  itself, 
but  more  important,  it  would  make  impossible 
an  accurate  reconstruction  of  Hadza  social 
organization  at  a later  date,  if  one  had  to  rely 
solely  on  the  memory  of  informants. 

On  the  other  hand,  several  participants  were 
more  sanguine  about  the  persistence  of  cultural 
traditions  into  the  postcontact  period.  Levi- 
Strauss  cited  the  example  of  the  retention  of 
marriage  ideology  by  Australian  aborigines  in 
the  face  of  acculturation  and  demographic 
reverses  (Chapter  17b,  17c).  In  addition,  care- 
ful reconstructions  of  precontact  ecological 
situations  were  presented  by  Watanabe,  for  the 
Ainu  of  the  1880’s  (Chapter  7),  and  by  Balikci, 
for  the  Netsilik  Eskimos  in  1919-20  (Chapter8). 

Finally,  June  Helm  pointed  out  that  the 
group  structure  of  such  diverse  peoples  as  the 
Dogrib  Indians,  the  IKung  Bushmen,  and  the 
Nambikwara  showed  striking  similarities  in 
spite  of  widely  differing  social  ideologies 
(Chapter  13).  This  suggests  that  small-scale 
societies  may  arrive  independently  at  similar 
solutions  to  similar  demographic  and  eco- 
logical problems.  Without  the  opportunity  of 
observing  behavior,  however,  such  an  import- 
ant point  would  be  impossible  to  establish.  This 
problem  is  discussed  further  by  Anderson 
(Chapter  17c). 


The  Subsistence  Base 

Strictly  speaking,  hunting  apd  gathering  refers 
to  a 'mode  of  subsistence,  and  many  of  the  con- 
ference papers  discussed  problems  of  ecology 
and  economic  organization.  Several  field 
workers  pointed  out  that  the  subsistence  base  of 
hunters  was  much  more  substantial  than  had 
been  previously  supposed.  It  came  as  a sur- 
prise to  some  that  even  the  “marginal” 
hunters  studied  by  ethnographers  actually  work 
short  hours  and  exploit  abundant  food  sources. 
Several  hunting  peoples  lived  well  on  two  to 
four  hours  of  subsistence  effort  per  day  and 
were  not  observed  to  undergo  the  periodic 
crises  that  have  been  commonly  attributed  to 
hunters  in  general  (Chapters  4,  5,  and  9b). 
Other  peoples  for  whom  detailed  activity  data 
were  unavailable  were  nevertheless  reported  to 
show  a “lack  of  concern”  about  the  problem  of 
finding  food.  This  led  the  conference  partici- 
pants to  speculate  whether  lack  of  “future 
orientation”  brought  happiness  to  the  members 
of  hunting  societies,  an  idyllic  attitude  that 
faded  when  changing  subsistence  patterns 
forced  men  to  amass  food  surpluses  to  bank 
against  future  shortages  (Chapter  gc). 

Dissenting  views  were  reported.  Balikci  spoke 
of  a “constant  ecological  pressure”  which 
caused  real  hardship  and  anxiety  among  the 
Netsilik  Eskimos  (Chapter  8).  Williams  (Chap- 
ter gc)  found  that  the  Birhor  of  India  not  only 
worked  hard  for  their  food  but  often  went 
hungry.  It  was  clear  that  Sahlins’  characteriza- 
tion of  the  hunters  (Chapter  9b)  as  the  “original 
affluent  society”  would  not  apply  in  all  cases. 
However  Sahlins’  argument  served  to  under- 
line the  point  that  anthropologists  have  tended 
to  view  the  hunters  from  the  vantage  point  of 
the  economics  of  scarcity.  Viewed  on  th^ir  own 
terms,  the  hunters  appear  to  know  the  fbod*re- 
sources  of  their  habitats  and  are  quite  capable 
of  taking  the  necessary  steps  to  feed  themselves. 
It  is  unlikely  that  hunters  would  have  de- 
liberately chosen  the  catch-as-catch-can  exist- 
ence that  has  been  ascribed  to  them.  Since  a 
routine  and  reliable  food  base  appears  to  be  a 
common  feature  among  modern  hunter- 
gatherers,  we  suspect  that  the  ancient  hunters 
living  in  much  better  environments  would 
have  enjoyed  an  even  more  substantial  food 
supply. 


Lee  and  Devore  Problems  in  the  Study  of  Hunters  and  Gatherers 


Hunting  vs.  Gathering 

The  hunting  of  mammals  has  been  considered 
the  characteristic  feature  of  the  subsistence  of 
early  man,  and  two  chapters  in  this  volume 
explore  the  implications  of  hunting  for  human 
evolution  (Washburn  and  Lancaster,  Chapter 
32;  and  Laughlin,  Chapter  33).  Modern 
hunters,  however,  depend  for  most  of  their  sub- 
sistence on  sources  other  than  meat,  mainly 
vegetable  foods,  fish,  and  shell  fish.  Only  in  the 
arctic  and  subarctic  areas  where  vegetable 
foods  are  unavailable  do  we  find  the  textbook 
examples  of  mammal  hunters.  Over  the  rest 
of  the  world,  hunting  appears  to  provide  only 
20  to  40  per  cent  of  the  diet  (Lee,  Chapter  4). 

Binford,  Washburn  and  Lancaster,  and 
others  expressed  the  view  that  fishing,  seed- 
grinding, and  hunting  with  dogs  are  late 
adaptations,  dating  from  the  Mesolithic  and 
therefore  not  characteristic  of  Pleistocene  con- 
ditions. Thus,  the  eclectic  diet  of  the  modern 
hunters  may  tell  us  little  about  the  food  habits 
of  early  man.  Our  own  view  is  that  vegetable 
foods  in  the  form  of  nuts,  berries,  and  roots 
were  always  available  to  early  man  and  were 
easily  exploited  by  even  the  simplest  of  tech- 
nologies. It  is  also  likely  that  early  woman 
would  not  have  remained  idle  during  the 
Pleistocene  and  that  plant  foods, which  are  so 
important  in  the  diet  of  inland  hunter- 
gatherers  today,  would  have  played  a similar 
role  in  the  diet  of  early  peoples.  We  agree, 
however,  that  hunting  would  become  increas- 
ingly important  as  populations  migrated  out  of 
the  tropics  into  areas  where  plant  foods  are 
scarce.  In  addition,  hunting  is  so  universal  and 
is  so  consistently  a male  activity  that  it  must 
have  been  a basic  part  of  the  early  cultural 
adaptation,  even  if  it  provided  only  a modest 
proportion  of  the  food  supplies. 

Social  and 

Territorial  Organization 

The  analysis  of  the  social  structure  of  the  hunt- 
ing and  gathering  peoples  proved  to  be  a par- 
ticularly difficult  area  of  investigation  because 
of  the  ambiguous  conditions  in  which  hunters 
are  currently  found.  Fluidity  of  band  composi- 
tion appeared  to  be  the  most  characteristic 


7 

feature  of  the  modern  hunters,  but  participants 
disagreed  on  whether  this  flexibility  was  basic 
to  the  hunting  way  of  life  or  whether  it  was  a 
product  of  recent  acculturation.  We  will  briefly 
outline  the  history  of  band  theory  from  Rad- 
cliffe-Brown,  through  Steward  to  Service  and 
then  go  on  to  consider  the  evidence  from 
recent  field  research. 

The  Patrilocal  Band 

Radcliffe-Brown  gave  this  concept  its  modern 
expression  in  “Social  Organization  of  Austra- 
lian Tribes,”  where  he  described  the  patrilineal, 
patrilocal,  territorial,  exogamous  horde  as  “the 
important  local  group  throughout  Australia” 
(1931,  p.  35).  The  horde  was  a group  of  patri- 
laterally  related  males  who  lived  and  worked 
within  their  totemic  estate  and  exchanged 
women  with  other  such  male-centered  groups. 
Steward,  in  a general  review  of  hunter- 
gatherers,  admitted  the  horde  or  “patrilineal 
band”  as  one  of  three  types  of  group  structure, 
but  he  added  the  composite  bands  of  the 
Northern  Athapaskans  and  the  family  bands 
of  Great  Basin  Shoshoneans  (1936,  1955).  This 
three-part  division  was  later  called  into  ques- 
tion by  Elman  Service  (1962),  who  took  the 
view  that  the  “patrilocal  band,”  as  he  called  it, 
was  not  only  the  characteristic  form  of  local 
organization  in  Australia  but  was  also  the  basic 
form  for  all  hunter-gatherers  in  the  past  (1962, 
pp.  65-67,  107-109).  The  composite  and 

family  bands,  in  Service’s  view,  were  artifacts 
of  recent  acculturation  and  breakdown. 

Recent  research  has  cast  doubt  on  the  model 
of  the  patrilocal  band.  Hiatt,  reviewing  the 
literature  on  Australian  local  organization 
(1962),  failed  to  find  a single  indisputable  ex- 
ample of  Radcliffe-Brown’s  horde.  The  exist- 
ence of  patrilineal  totemic  clans  has  been  well 
documented,  but  these  functioned  in  ritual 
contexts  and  not  as  residential  or  economic 
units.  Hiatt  concludes: 

It  is  now  clear  that  over  a great  deal  of  the 
continent  the  male  members  of  totemic  descent 
groups  did  not  live  together  on  separate  pieces  of 
land.  They  commonly  lived  in  communities  that 
contained  male  members  of  several  totemic 
descent  groups  and  regularly  sought  food  over 


8 Introduction 


areas  that  included  totemic  sites  other  than  their 
own.  Investigators  that  failed  to  find  the  horde 
in  particular  tribes  were  not  (as  some  of  them 
thought)  observing  aberrant  forms  of  local 
organization.  They  were  probably  looking  for 
something  that  never  existed  in  any  tribe  (ig62, 
p.  286). 

Other  ethnographers  who  had  worked 
among  “patrilocal  band”  peoples  also  failed  to 
find  this  form  of  organization  operating  now  or 
at  any  discoverable  period  in  the  past.  Turn- 
bull  among  the  Mbuti  Pygmies  (Chapter  15), 
Lee  and  Marshall  among  the  Bushmen  (Chap- 
ters 4 and  17 c)  and  Meggitt  (Chapter  19)  all 
report  the  occurrence  of  composite  and  flexible 
local  groups.  Others  have  studied  the  ethno- 
historic  record  of  peoples  that  Service  claimed 
had  patrilocal  organization  in  the  past.  Helm 
on  the  Athapaskans  (Chapter  13),  Damas  on 
the  Eskimo  (Chapter  12),  and  Pilling  on  the 
southeastern  Australians  (Chapter  16)  present 
evidence  that  the  composite  bands  observed  in 
the  present  were  characteristic  of  the  earliest 
contact  periods  as  well. 

The  patrilocal  band,  however,  is  not  an 
empty  category;  cases  are  presented  in  which 
a patrilocal  organization  was  in  evidence,  in- 
cluding the  Ona  of  South  America  (Bridges, 
1949,  cited  by  Lathrap  in  Chapter  gd),  the 
Kaiadilt  of  Australia  (Tindale,  1962b,  cited  by 
Birdsell  in  Chapter  1 7a)  and  the  Birhor  of 
India  (Williams  in  Chapter  14). 

On  the  basis  of  present  evidence,  it  appears 
that  the  patrilocal  band  is  certainly  not  the 
universal  form  of  hunter  group  structure  that 
Service  thought  it  was.  Anderson  (Chapter 
17c),  Turnbull  (Chapter  15),  Eggan  (Chapter 
1 7i) , and  others  pointed  out  that  the  fluid 
organization  of  recent  hunters  has  certain 
adaptive  advantages,  including  the  adjustment 
of  group  size  to  resources,  the  leveling  out  of 
demographic  variance,  and  the  resolution  of 
conflict  by  fission.  These  features  are  indepen- 
dent of  the  effects  of  acculturation  and  would 
have  been  no  less  adaptive  in  precontact 
situations.  Given  these  advantages,  few  of  the 
conferees  would  endorse  Service’s  view  that  the 
patrilocal  band  “seems  almost  an  inevitable 
kind  of  organization”  or  that  “the  composite 
band  ...  is  obviously  a product  of  the  near 
destruction  of  aboriginal  bands  after  contact 


with  civilization”  (1962,  p.  108).  In  fact 
Service  himself  has  recently  revised  his  opinion 
that  the  patrilocal  band  is  inevitable. 

Service  has  correctly  drawn  attention  to  the 
effects  of  contact  on  hunter-gatherer  social 
organization,  and  this  remains  a difficult  prob- 
lem for  the  ethnographers.  Although  fluid 
organization  makes  ecological  sense  for  many 
hunters,  and  could  be  shown  to  be  more  adap- 
tive than  patrilocal  organization,  in  itself  this 
is  not  evidence  for  aboriginal  conditions.  Since 
all  hunting  societies  have  suffered  to  some  ex- 
tent from  contact,  we  may  never  be  able  to 
prove  conclusively  that  one  form  or  another 
was  typical  of  the  past  in  any  specific  case. 

The  Problem  of  Corporation 

Sharp  (Chapter  1 7h)  warns  against  the  use  of 
“prefabricated  constructs”  in  the  study  of  band 
organization.  The  prevalence  of  such  constructs 
may  derive  from  the  application  of  concepts  de- 
veloped in  tribal  societies  to  the  study  of 
simpler  and  smaller-scale  societies.  The  social 
units  of  tribal  societies  are  based  on  the  control 
and  husbandry  of  real  property  usually  in  the 
form  of  agricultural  land  or  livestock  (Fortes, 
1953).  In  addition,  the  formal  political  insti- 
tutions such  as  courts,  councils,  and  chieftain- 
ships lends  a distinctive  character  to  social 
relations  of  tribesmen  that  is  lacking  in  the 
smaller-scale  societies  of  hunters  and  gatherers. 
Radcliffe-Brown’s  well-known  views  on  the 
universal  importance  of  lineal  descent  and 
corporation  ( 1952)  may  have  led  him  to  impose 
a corporate  unilineal  model  on  Australian 
local  groups. 

However,  the  reports  in  this  volume  make  it 
clear  that  the  hunter-gatherer  band  is  not  a 
corporation  of  persons  who  are  bound  to- 
gether by  the  necessity  of  maintaining  property. 
A corporation  requires  two  conditions:  a group 
of  people  must  have  some  resource  to  incor- 
porate about  and  there  must  be  some  means  of 
defining  who  is  to  have  rights  over  this  re- 
source. Among  most  hunter-gatherers  one  or 
both  of  these  conditions  are  lacking.  In 
Australia  and  among  the  Birhor,  the  patrilineal 
descent  groups  are  present  but  these  groups  do 
not  maintain  exclusive  rights  to  territorial  re- 
sources (Hiatt  in  Chapter  10,  Williams  in 


Lee  and  DeVore  Problems  in  the  Study  of  Hunters  and  Gatherers 


Chapter  14).  Among  the  Mbuti  Pygmies  the 
territories  are  well-defined  but  the  membership 
in  the  resource-using  group  is  open  and  changes 
frequently  (Turnbull  in  Chapter  15).  Among 
the  Dogrib  (Helm  in  Chapter  13),  the  Bushmen 
(Lee  in  Chapter  4),  the  central  Eskimo  (Damas 
in  Chapter  12  and  Balikci  in  Chapter  8)  and 
the  Hadza  (Woodburnin  Chapter  1 1),  both  the 
composition  of  the  group  and  the  range  they 
exploit  may  vary  from  season  to  season.  The 
existence  of  this  variety  makes  it  difficult  to 
accept  a model  of  hunter  local  groups  that  en- 
capsulates each  group  of  males  within  a terri- 
tory, with  exchange  of  women  as  the  primary 
mode  of  communication  between  groups. 

Flexibility  and  the 
Resolution  of  Conflict  by  Fission 

Turnbull  (1965b  and  Chapter  15)  has  defined 
an  important  means  of  social  control  among 
the  Mbuti  Pygmies.  When  disputes  arise  within 
the  band,  the  principals  simply  part  company 
rather  than  allow  the  argument  to  cross  the 
threshold  of  violence.  By  this  seemingly  simple 
device,  harmony  is  maintained  within  the  co- 
operating group  without  recourse  to  fighting  or 
to  formal  modes  of  litigation.  The  essential 
condition  seems  to  be  the  lack  of  exclusive 
rights  to  resources;  thus  it  is  a relatively  simple 
matter  for  individuals  and  groups  to  separate 
when  harmony  is  threatened.  The  effect  of  this 
practice  is  to  keep  the  population  circulating 
between  band  territories.  Such  a form  of  con- 
flict resolution  would  not  be  possible  in  situa- 
tions where  social  units  are  strictly  defined  and 
firmly  attached  to  parcels  of  real  estate.  Wood- 
burn  and  Lee  reported  a similar  mode  of  con- 
flict resolution  among  the  Hadza  and  IKung 
Bushmen;  judging  from  their  generally  flexible 
group  structure,  resolution  of  conflict  by 
fission  may  well  be  a common  property  of 
nomadic  hunting  societies. 

Order  and  Chaos  in 
Hunter-Gatherer  Society 

One  of  the  attractions  of  the  patrilocal  band 
model  is  the  neatness  of  its  formulation.  In  such 
a model  the  society  is  structured  by  the  opera- 


9 

tion  of  a small  number  of  fundamental  jural 
rules:  territorial  ownership  by  males,  band 
exogamy,  and  viripatrilocal  postmarital  resi- 
dence. However,  the  model  leaves  scant  room 
either  for  local  and  seasonal  variations  in  food 
supply  or  for  variance  in  sex  ratios  and  family 
size  within  and  between  local  groups.  Nor  does 
the  model,  in  many  cases,  accord  with  the  ob- 
served facts,  and  in  this  light  it  appears  to  be 
more  a convenience  for  the  analyst  than  a 
workable  socioeconomic  system. 

Flexibility  of  living  arrangements  presents  at 
first  a confusing  and  disorderly  picture. 
Brothers  may  be  united  or  divided,  marriage 
may  take  place  within  or  outside  the  local 
group,  and  local  groups  may  vary  in  numbers 
from  one  week  to  the  next.  Helm  (1965a  and 
Chapter  1 3)  has  made  a valuable  contribution 
to  the  methodology  of  band-composition 
analysis.  By  tabulating  the  primary  relative 
linkages  within  Athapaskan  groups,  she  has 
been  able  to  show  that  married  couples  always 
join  groups  in  which  a sibling,  parent,  or  child 
of  one  of  the  spouses  is  already  resident.  This 
produces  a local  group  whose  members  are 
joined  by  a series  of  links  through  brothers, 
sisters,  and  spouses,  often  centered  around  a 
strong  core  of  male  siblings.  However,  the 
orientation  is  bilateral  rather  than  lineal  and 
serves  to  unite  persons  into  effective  work 
groups  regardless  of  whether  the  kinship  ties 
are  patrilateral,  matrilateral,  or  affinal.  Appli- 
cation of  this  method  to  other  hunters  reveals  a 
similar  mode  of  affiliation  among  the  Nambik- 
wara,  Bushmen,  Hadza,  and  Arnhem  Land 
aborigines.  The  bilateral  nature  of  hunter  local 
groups  is  not  simply  a matter  of  people  failing 
to  conform  to  their  stated  jural  rules;  several  of 
the  peoples  just  mentioned  do  not  express  an 
ideology  of  fixed  membership  groups.  There  is 
order  in  hunter-gatherer  society,  although  not 
necessarily  an  order  imposed  by  the  operation 
of  residence  and  descent  rules. 


Marriage  Arrangements  in  Australia 

The  way  Australian  aborigines  marry  has  held 
a central  place  in  the  anthropological  study  of 
kinship.  The  articulation  between  kin  terms 
and  cross-cousin  marriage  on  the  one  hand, 
and  moieties,  sections  and  subsections  on  the 


i o Introduction 


other,  have  provided  materials  for  a number  of 
analysts,  including  Radcliffe-Brown,  Leach, 
Murdock,  Needham,  and  Levi-Strauss.  Since 
the  symposium  was  concerned  with  the  hunting 
way  of  life  and  not  with  the  study  of  marriage 
per  se,  the  several  papers  on  the  subject 
attempted  to  place  Australian  marriage  and 
section  systems  into  the  general  context  of 
hunter-gatherer  ecology  and  demography. 
Hiatt,  for  example  (Chapter  18)  presents  a 
model  of  the  operation  of  an  eight-section  sys- 
tem and  then  goes  on  to  show  that,  given  the 
small  population  of  the  Gidjingali  of  Arnhem 
Land,  only  a fraction  of  the  marriages  can  be 
contracted  between  the  cross-cousins  specified 
by  the  model.  The  lack  of  women  of  the  appro- 
priate kin  position  makes  it  necessary  for  most 
men  to  seek  a spouse  elsewhere.  Although  over 
90  per  cent  of  the  marriages  are  “morally 
proper,”  in  other  words  contracted  between 
persons  of  the  correct  subsections,  the  net  result 
is  that  women  do  not  function  as  a medium  of 
exchange  between  descent  groups.  In  his  com- 
ment (Chapter  22b)  Levi-Strauss  acknow- 
ledges the  importance  of  relating  stated  norms 
to  demographic  variables  but  he  goes  on  to  say 
that  his  work  in  Australian  kinship  has  been 
“concerned  with  a different  problem:  to  ascer- 
tain what  was  the  meaning  of  the  rules, 
whether  they  be  applied  or  not.”  He  expresses 
the  view  that  the  evidence  of  a “collapsing 
Australian  tribe”  is  not  sufficient  to  make  us 
discard  the  earlier  formulations  of  Radcliffe- 
Brown  and  others  which  demonstrated  that 
marriage  was  indeed  regarded  by  the  natives 
as  an  exchange  of  women  between  descent 
groups. 

Meggitt  (Chapter  19)  and  Yengoyan  (Chap- 
ter 20)  both  bring  demographic  data  to  bear 
on  the  study  of  section  systems,  but  they  arrive 
at  different  conclusions.  Meggitt  notes  that  a 
series  of  fifteen  central  Australian  tribes  all  ex- 
hibit a division  into  eight  subsections,  despite 
the  fact  that  the  populations  of  several  of  the 
tribes  are  less  than  200  persons,  too  small  for 
marriages  to  be  contracted  only  between  the 
members  of  appropriate  subsections.  This  fact 
leads  Meggitt  to  conclude  that  “among  the 
Australian  aborigines,  subsections  are  not 
necessarily  concerned  in  . . . the  regulation  of 
marriage”  (Chapter  19).  Yengoyan  argues  that 
subsections  do  regulate  marriage,  but  only  very 


large  tribes  can  successfully  operate  an  eight- 
section  system.  A tribe  of  1,100  persons,  for 
example,  would  have  no  difficulty  in  arranging 
“proper”  marriages  since  each  of  the  eight 
divisions  would  contain  about  25  eligible 
mates.  On  the  other  hand,  a tribe  numbering 
200  persons  or  less  would  not  be  able  to  arrange 
marriages  without  considerable  deviation  from 
the  stated  rules  and,  in  fact,  few  of  the  small 
tribes  in  Yengoyan’s  sample  exhibited  an  eight- 
section  organization. 

Rose  (1960b  and  Chapter  21)  adds  a further 
demographic  variable  by  demonstrating  that 
among  the  Australians,  men  tended  to  marry 
women  a generation  younger  than  themselves. 
In  combination  with  polygyny,  this  practice 
allows  men  in  their  forties  and  fifties  to  mono- 
polize the  majority  of  women  of  marriagable 
age.  The  function  of  this  “gerontocracy”  as 
Rose  calls  it,  is  to  combine  the  women  into 
effective  food-producing  units,  centered  around 
a male  at  the  peak  of  his  “political”  career. 

Recent  demographic  research  has  added  a 
new  dimension  to  the  study  of  Australian  sys- 
tems. Aboriginal  marriage  now  appears  to  be 
more  explicable  in  terms  of  the  economic  con- 
ditions under  which  the  people  actually  lived. 
Yet  the  basic  question  raised  by  Levi-Strauss 
remains : How  are  the  stated  rules  of  social  life 
articulated  into  a meaningful  whole?  It  is  clear 
that  more  work  is  urgently  required  in  Aus- 
tralia, although  we  suspect  that  it  may  already 
be  too  late  to  establish  the  relation  of  ideo- 
logical forms  to  the  behavior  of  persons  on  the 
ground. 

Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

Many  of  the  peoples  discussed  at  the  sym- 
posium live  in  small-scale  societies  in  which  the 
total  population  numbers  a thousand  persons 
or  less.  The  social  and  ecological  consequences 
of  “smallness”  were  considered  in  several 
papers.  Dunn  (Chapter  23)  made  the  interest- 
ing point  that  small  groups  of  nomadic  peoples 
living  at  low  population  densities  would  be 
much  more  resistant  to  epidemic  diseases  than 
farming  peoples  who  live  at  higher  densities  in 
settled  villages.  Others  speculated  on  the  ideal 
sizes  of  hunter  local  groups  and  breeding 
populations,  and  two  figures  in  particular  came 


Lee  and  DeVore  Problems  in  the  Study  of  Hunters  and  Gatherers 


to  be  called  the  “magic  numbers”  of  hunter- 
gatherer  demography  (Chapter  25c).  Birdsell 
(Chapter  24)  cites  a figure  of  500  as  the  modal 
size  of  tribes  in  aboriginal  Australia;  such  a 
population  was  large  enough  to  insure  an  ade- 
quate recruitment  of  mates  and  yet  small 
enough  for  everyone  to  know  everyone  else. 
There  was  some  evidence  that  tribes  of  larger 
size  tended  to  subdivide  into  smaller  and  more 
manageable  units.  Twenty-five  to  fifty  persons 
were  the  figures  most  frequently  reported  for 
the  size  of  local  groups  or  bands  among  modern 
hunter-gatherers,  although  we  failed  to  arrive 
at  any  satisfactory  explanation  for  this  central 
tendency. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  demographic 
issue  was  the  question  of  what  are  the  factors 
that  keep  the  populations  of  hunters  in  check. 
Throughout  the  world  hunter  densities  rarely 
exceed  one  person  per  square  mile;  most  of  the 
accurate  figures  reported  at  the  conference 
ranged  between  one  and  25  persons  per 
hundred  square  miles.  We  feel  that  the  one- 
per-square-mile  figure  is  a useful  estimate  of 
Pleistocene  carrying  capacity.  It  was  not  until 
the  development  of  agriculture  that  human 
populations  were  able  to  break  this  limit  for 
the  first  time,  while  present  agricultural 
densities  in  most  parts  of  the  world  exceed 
the  highest  hunter  densities  by  a factor  of  ten 
to  one  thousand. 

Disease,  malnutrition,  and  infanticide  were 
each  considered  as  possible  control  mecha- 
nisms for  hunter-gatherer  populations.  Since 
food  supply  appears  to  be  abundant  in  modern 
cases,  the  constant  threat  of  famine  has  prob- 
ably been  overestimated  as  a population  con- 
trol. On  the  other  hand,  the  management  of 
fertility  by  means  of  long  lactation,  birth  con- 
trol, the  killing  of  twins,  and  systematic  infanti- 
cide may  have  been  as  frequent  in  early 
populations  as  they  are  among  hunters  today. 
Birdsell  and  Deevey  (Chapters  22b,  22d)  went 
so  far  as  to  suggest  that  a 15-50  per  cent  inci- 
dence of  infanticide  may  have  existed  through- 
out the  preagricultural  history  of  man. 

Helm  and  Washburn  (Chapter  9a)  follow- 
ing Bartholomew  and  Birdsell  (1953)  suggested 
that  we  consider  what  works  in  the  long  run.  A 
population  may  thrive  for  several  generations 
and  give  every  appearance  of  being  successfully 
adapted,  only  to  be  cut  back  severely  by  an 


1 1 

ecological  reverse  once  in  a hundred  years. 
Probably  the  most  successful  long-term  situa- 
tion is  for  a population  to  become  stabilized  at 
20  or  30  per  cent  of  carrying  capacity,  but  at 
the  present  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  how 
such  an  equilibrium  may  be  achieved.  For- 
tunately, it  is  still  possible  to  gather  the 
necessary  demographic  data  among  some  of 
the  modern  hunter-gatherers,  and  we  hope 
that  these  data,  plus  computer  simulation  of 
population  models,  will  yield  exceptionally 
useful  results. 


“Nomadic  Style”: 

A Trial  Formulation 

Although  the  conference  on  Man  the  Hunter 
raised  more  questions  than  it  answered,  there 
seemed  to  be  a widespread  feeling  among  the 
participants  that  a useful  beginning  had  been 
made  in  understanding  the  hunters  better.  A 
number  of  older  theories  were  corrected  in 
light  of  new  data  and,  where  issues  were  un- 
resolved, we  came  away  at  least  with  a clearer 
appreciation  of  our  differences,  To  attempt  to 
draw  a general  picture  of  the  hunters  at  this 
time  would  certainly  be  premature;  we  would, 
however,  like  to  offer  a trial  formulation  of  our 
views  to  serve  as  a starting  point  for  future  re- 
search and  discussion. 

We  make  two  basic  assumptions  about 
hunters  and  gatherers:  (1)  they  live  in  small 
groups  and  (2)  they  move  around  a lot.  Each 
local  group  is  associated  with  a geographical 
range  but  these  groups  do  not  function  as 
closed  social  systems.  Probably  from  the  very 
beginning  there  was  communication  between 
groups,  including  reciprocal  visiting  and  mar- 
riage alliances,  so  that  the  basic  hunting 
society  consisted  of  a series  of  local  “bands’*’ 
which  were  part  of  a larger  breeding  and 
linguistic  community.  The  economic  system  is 
based  on  several  core  features  including  a home 
base  or  camp,  a division  of  labor — with  males 
hunting  and  females  gathering — and,  most 
important,  a pattern  of  sharing  out  the  col- 
lected food  resources. 

These  few  broadly  defined  features  provide 
an  organizational  base  line  of  the  small-scale 
society  from  which  subsequent  developments 
can  be  derived.  We  visualize  a social  system 


12 


Introduction 


with  the  following  characteristics.  First,  if 
individuals  and  groups  have  to  move  around  in 
order  to  get  food  there  is  an  important  implica- 
tion : the  amount  of  personal  property  has  to  be 
kept  to  a very  low  level.  Constraints  on  the  pos- 
session of  property  also  serve  to  keep  wealth 
differences  between  individuals  to  a minimum 
and  we  postulate  a generally  egalitarian  system 
for  the  hunters. 

Second,  the  nature  of  the  food  supply  keeps 
the  living  groups  small,  usually  under  fifty 
persons.  Large  concentrations  of  population 
would  rapidly  exhaust  the  immediate  re- 
sources, and  members  would  be  forced  to  dis- 
perse into  smaller  foraging  units.  It  is  likely,  as 
Mauss  observed  (1906),  that  several  bands 
would  come  together  on  a seasonal  basis,  result- 
ing in  a division  of  the  year  into  “public”  and 
“private”  periods.  Because  of  the  small  size  of 
the  living  groups  and  the  wide  variance  of  family 
size,  bands  wax  and  wane  in  numbers.  It  is  prob- 
ably necessary  to  continually  redistribute  the 
population  between  bands  in  order  to  maintain 
food-gathering  units  at  an  effective  level. 

Third,  the  local  groups  as  groups  do  not 
ordinarily  maintain  exclusive  rights  to  re- 
sources. Variations  in  food  supply*  from  region 
to  region  and  from  year  to  year  create  a fluid 
situation  that  can  best  be  met  by  flexible 
organizations  that  allow  people  to  move  from 
one  area  to  another.  The  visiting  patterns 
create  intergroup  obligations,  so  that  the  hosts 
in  one  season  become  the  guests  in  another.  We 
think  that  reciprocal  access  to  food  resources 
would  rank  as  equal  in  importance  with  ex- 
change of  spouses  as  a means  of  communication 
between  groups.  It  is  likely  that  food  may  ante- 
date women  as  the  original  medium  of  ex- 
change (cf.  Levi-Strauss,  1949). 

Fourth,  food  surpluses  are  not  a prominent 
feature  of  the  small-scale  society.  If  inventories 
of  food  on  hand  are  minimal,  then  a fairly  con- 
stant work  effort  has  to  be  kept  up  throughout 
the  year.  Since  everyone  knows  where  the  food 
is,  in  effect  the  environment  itself  is  the  store- 
house; and  since  everyone  knows  the  move- 
ments of  everyone  else,  there  is  a lack  of 
concern  that  food  resources  will  fail  or  be 
appropriated  by  others. 

Fifth,  frequent  visiting  between  resource 
areas  prevents  any  one  group  from  becoming 
too  strongly  attached  to  any  single  area.  Ritual 


sites  are  commonly  associated  with  specific 
groups,  but  the  livelihood  of  the  people  does 
not  depend  on  such  sites.  Further,  the  lack  of 
impediments  in  the  form  of  personal  and  col- 
lective property  allows  a considerable  degree  of 
freedom  of  movement.  Individuals  and  groups 
can  change  residence  without  relinquishing 
vital  interests  in  land  or  goods,  and  when 
arguments  break  out  it  is  a simple  matter  to 
part  company  in  order  to  avoid  serious  con- 
flict. This  is  not  to  say  that  violence  is  un- 
known; both  homicide  and  sorcery  are  found 
among  a number  of  current  hunter-gatherers. 
The  resolution  of  conflict  by  fission,  however, 
may  help  to  explain  how  order  can  be  main- 
tained in  a society  without  superordinate 
means  of  social  control. 

At  the  symposium  we  presented  some  of 
these  ideas  under  the  general  heading  of  the 
“Nomadic  Style.”  Several  others  found  this 
view  plausible  and  suggested  ways  in  which 
specific  cases  might  have  developed  out  of  this 
baseline.  L.  Binford  noted  that  northern 
adaptations  required  a more  elaborate  mate- 
rial basis,  including  fixed  facilities  such  as  fish 
weirs  and  game  fences,  and  more  substantial 
dwellings,  clothing,  and  tool  kits.  Steward 
pointed  out  that  the  development  of  traction 
and  water  transport  would  allow  northern 
peoples  to  own  more  and  yet  still  retain 
mobility  (Chapter  34) . And  Suttles  (Chapter  6) 
showed  how  the  fisherman  of  the  Northwest 
coast  may  have  originally  started  out  in  small 
nomadic  bands,  but  were  subsequently  led 
into  surplus  accumulation,  heavy  facilities, 
and  ceremonial  exchange  by  the  necessity  to 
bank  against  vagaries  in  salmon  supply. 

It  seems  clear  that  when  the  means  of  pro- 
duction come  to  depend  upon  the  exclusive 
control  of  resources  and  facilities,  then  the 
loose  non-corporate  nature  of  the  small-scale 
society  cannot  be  maintained.  If  this  view  is 
correct,  then  a major  trend  in  human  affairs 
has  been  the  transformations  of  social  relations 
as  advanced  technologies  and  formal  insti- 
tutions have  come  to  play  a more  and  more 
dominant  role  in  the  human  adaptation.  The 
institutions  of  property,  of  clan  organization^ 
of  government,  and  of  the  state  did  not  spring 
full-blown  in  a divine  creation.  The  study  of 
the  hunters  may  help  to  understand  how  these 
things  came  into  being. 


2 


The  Current  Status 

of  the  World’s  Hunting  and  Gathering  Peoples 


GEORGE  PETER  MURDOCK 


Ten  thousand  years  ago  the  entire  population 
of  the  earth  subsisted  by  hunting  and  gather- 
ing, as  their  ancestors  had  done  since  the  dawn 
of  culture.  By  the  time  of  Christ,  eight  thou- 
sand years  later,  tillers  and  herders  had 
replaced  them  over  at  least  half  of  the  earth. 
At  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  the  New  World, 
only  perhaps  15  per  cent  of  the  earth’s  surface 
was  still  occupied  by  hunters  and  gatherers, 
and  this  area  has  continued  to  decline  at  a pro- 
gressive rate  until  the  present  day,  when  only  a 
few  isolated  pockets  survive. 

Many  of  the  peoples  who  subsisted  by  hunt- 
ing and  gathering  at  the  time  of  Columbus 
have  disappeared  entirely  and  been  replaced 
by  stronger  peoples.  Others  have  been  reduced 
to  dependency — on  reservations  or  as  servants 
or  outcaste  groups.  Still  others  have  made  a 
transition,  in  some  form  or  other,  to  modes  of 
subsistence  based  on  agriculture,  animal  hus- 
bandry, or  industrial  employment.  Only  a 
handful  still  live  an  independent  life  of  hunt- 
ing and  gathering,  nearly  all  of  them  under 
markedly  altered  conditions.  It  is  time — in- 
deed, long  past  time — that  we  took  stock  of 
these  dwindling  remnants,  for  it  is  only  among 
them  that  we  can  still  study  at  first  hand  the 
modes  of  life  and  types  of  cultural  adjustments 
that  prevailed  throughout  most  of  human 
history. 


In  this  paper  I shall  attempt  to  enumerate 
and  briefly  characterize  the  regions  of  the 
world  where  peoples  with  hunting  and  gather- 
ing economies  survived  long  enough  to  be 
studied  by  modern  ethnographers,  with  special 
reference  to  those  groups  amongst  whom  funda- 
mental field  research  may  still  be  possible. 

The  definition  of  hunting  and  gathering 
economies  was  the  subject  of  considerable  dis- 
cussion at  the  symposium.  For  the  sake  of  sim- 
plicity in  presentation,  I shall  adopt  a strict 
definition  and  merely  allude  here,  by  way  of 
introduction,  to  three  marginal  subsistence 
categories  which  some  would  include  with 
hunting  and  gathering  and  others  would 
differentiate. 


Mounted  Hunters 

Several  groups  of  peoples  who  subsist  primarily 
by  hunting  depend  largely  on  domestic  animals 
which  they  ride  in  pursuing  or  surrounding 
their  game.  Notable  among  them  are  the  North 
American  Indians  of  the  Plains  and  the  ad- 
jacent sections  of  the  Plateau  and  Great  Basin 
and  the  South  American  Indians  of  Patagonia 
and  the  adjacent  Gran  Chaco,  both  of  which 
groups  hunted  with  horses  during  the  period  of 
their  ethnographic  description.  Comparable  to 


13 


EskimOv^^ 

Athabaskan  I Siberian  hunters 


1 4 Introduction 


Figure  i.  Distribution  of  Recent  Hunters  and  Gatherers. 


Fuegians 


Murdock  The  Current  Status  of  the  World's  Hunting  and  Gathering  Peoples 


them  are  several  hunting  peoples  in  Mauri- 
tania, including  the  Nemadi  described  by 
Gabus  (1951-52),  who  employ  camels  in  the 
chase.  Mounted  hunters  approximate  pastoral 
nomads  in  a number  of  respects,  the  chief 
difference,  perhaps,  being  the  fact  that  their 
domestic  animals  do  not  provide  a major  part 
of  their  food  supply. 

Sedentary  -Fishermen 

Various  other  peoples  who  lack  both  agricul- 
ture and  large  domestic  animals  depend  not  so 
much  on  hunting  and  gathering  as  on  fishing, 
shellfishing,  or  the  pursuit  of  aquatic  animals. 
Where  they  lead  an  essentially  nomadic  mode 
of  life,  I classify  them  with  hunters  and  gather- 
ers. Sometimes,  however,  their  marine  food 
supply  is  so  plentiful  and  stable  that  they  have 
been  able  to  adopt  an  exclusively  or  pre- 
dominantly sedentary  mode  of  life.  Such  con- 
ditions offer  the  possibility  of  attaining  a 
considerable  degree  of  cultural  complexity 
otherwise  achievable  only  with  intensive  agri- 
culture. The  Indians  of  the  North  Pacific  coast, 
for  example,  seem  to  me  to  fall  well  beyond  the 
range  of  cultural  variation  of  any  known  hunt- 
ing and  gathering  people.  The  Calusa,  a 
sedentary  fishing  people  of  southern  Florida, 
as  Goggin  and  Sturtevant  (1964)  have  shown, 
had  even  elaborated  a political  system  with 
fairly  sizable  states.  Along  the  Niger  and 
Congo  rivers  in  Africa,  numerous  societies 
which  subsist  primarily  by  fishing  and  trade 
have  cultures  in  no  way  inferior  in  complexity 
to  those  of  their  agricultural  neighbors.  In 
northeastern  Asia  the  Ainu,  Maritime  Chuk- 
chee, Gilyak,  Kamchadal  or  Italmen,  and 
Maritime  Koryak  possibly,  though  less  cer- 
tainly, fall  into  the  same  category. 

Incipient  Tillers 

Not  a few  peoples,  especially  though  not  ex- 
clusively in  lowland  South  America,  practice 
agriculture  but  obtain  more  of  their  food  sup- 
ply from  hunting,  fishing,  and  gathering  and 
show  a clear  preference  for  hunting  over  tillage. 
Several  participants  in  the  symposium,  notably 
Crocker  with  reference  to  the  Ge,  characterized 


15 

such  incipient  agriculturists  as  having  a hunt- 
ing-gathering ideology.  While  I freely  grant 
their  point,  I have  preferred  to  exclude  such 
groups  from  my  survey.  After  all,  I know  many 
American  farmers  who  till  the  soil  for  a living 
but  derive  considerably  more  personal  gratifi- 
cation from  their  subsidiary  hunting  and 
fishing  activities. 

In  the  listing  of  hunting  and  gathering 
peoples  below,  consequently,  I omit  all  groups 
which  I would  categorize  as  mounted  hunters, 
sedentary  fishermen,  or  incipient  tillers.  I 
gratefully  acknowledge  the  many  suggestions 
made  by  participants  in  the  symposium  which 
have  enabled  me  substantially  to  amplify  and 
revise  the  original  draft  of  this  paper.  Twenty- 
seven  surviving  groups  of  hunter-gatherers  are 
enumerated  in  this  survey.  The  geographical 
distribution  of  these  peoples  is  plotted  in 
Figure  1. 

Africa 

1.  Bushmen 

I shall  begin  my  enumeration  with  the  Bush- 
men of  south  and  southwest  Africa,  of  whom 
about  45,000  are  reported  to  survive  today 
(Tobias,  1956;  Silberbauer,  1965).  The  vast 
majority  of  these,  however,  are  attached  to  the 
Tswana  as  serfs  or  to  Europeans  as  servants  or 
laborers  and  have  undergone  intensive  accul- 
turation. Nevertheless,  about  5,000  of  them  still 
pursue  essentially  their  aboriginal  nomadic 
mode  of  life.  Lorna  Marshall  (1957,  1959, 
i960),  in  particular,  has  demonstrated  that 
field  work  of  the  highest  quality  is  still  possible 
among  them.  They  are  dealt  with  in  greater 
detail  by  Richard  B.  Lee  (Chapter  4,  this 
volume). 

2.  Koroca 

On  the  desert  coast  and  adjacent  foothills  of 
southwestern  Angola  live  the  Koroca  and  the 
related  Kwepe  and  Kwise,  who  practice  no 
agriculture.  From  very  fragmentary  reports, 
they  appear  to  resemble  the  Bushmen  in 
culture  and  the  Bergdama  in  physique 
(Almeida,  1965).  Remarks  by  Jorge  Dias 
suggest  that  they  merit  more  intensive  study. 


1 6 Introduction 


Desmond  Clark  believes  that  there  may  also  be 
Bantu  hunting  tribes  in  the  same  general  area. 

3.  Pygmies 

About  1 70,000  Pygmies  are  reported  to  survive 
in  the  tropical  forest  region  of  central  Africa, 
nearly  all  in  a dependent  symbiotic  relationship 
with  the  neighboring  Negro  tribes.  The 
majority,  especially  those  in  Rwanda,  Burundi, 
and  the  central  portion  of  the  Republic  of  the 
Congo,  have  either  adopted  agriculture  or 
otherwise  become  strongly  acculturated.  In 
the  Ituri  Forest  region  of  the  northeast,  how- 
ever, the  Aka,  Efe,  and  Mbuti  groups  still  pre- 
serve large  portions  of  their  indigenous  culture. 
For  the  Mbuti,  in  particular,  we  have  a sub- 
stantial monograph  by  Schebesta  (1938-50) 
and  the  more  intimate  and  revealing  studies 
by  Turnbull  (1961,  1965b).  There  is  certainly 
room  for  further  field  work  here,  and  probably 
also  among  the  inadequately  described  Pyg- 
mies of  Cameroon  and  Gabon. 

4.  East  African  Hunters 

Until  very  recently,  available  information  on 
the  surviving  hunting  populations  of  east 
Africa  has  been  exceedingly  scanty.  Now, 
however,  we  have  a series  of  substantial 
accounts  of  the  Dorobo  from  Huntingford 
(1951,  1954,  1955)  and  the  still  more  recent 
field  work  among  the  Hadza  or  Kindiga  by 
James  Woodburn (Chapters 5,  3,  this  volume). 
The  Teuso  or  Ik  described  by  Colin  Turnbull, 
though  possibly  related  to  the  Dorobo,  are  not 
a hunting  people  in  the  strict  sense  adopted 
here.  It  is  doubtless  too  late  to  expect  new 
information  on  the  Asa  or  Aramanic  beyond 
the  scraps  contained  inMerker(i904),but  it  still 
maybe  possible  to  conduct  rewarding  fieldwork 
among  the  Ariangulo,  the  Boni,  or  the  Sanye. 

5.  Ethiopian  Hunters 

William  Shack  reminded  the  symposium  that 
there  are  half  a dozen  groups  of  hunters  and 
gatherers  in  central  Ethiopia,  extending  from 
the  lakes  of  the  Rift  valley  on  the  east  to  the 
edge  of  the  plateau  in  the  west.  He  called  par- 
ticular attention  to  the  Fuga,  whom  he  found 
still  flourishing  in  the  Gurage  country.  I omit- 


ted these  peoples  in  my  original  survey  because, 
from  the  scanty  references  available  to  me, 
they  seemed  more  like  despised  outcaste 
groups  than  independent  tribes.  If  they  do  in 
fact  lead  independent  lives,  they  certainly 
deserve  early  and  intensive  study. 

East  Asia 

6.  Siberian  Hunters 

The  non-agricultural  peoples  of  Siberia  have 
long  since  been  largely  converted  to  a pastoral 
mode  of  life  in  the  interior  or,  on  the  coast, 
have  come  to  depend  primarily  upon  fishing 
and  have  adopted  a relatively  sedentary  settle- 
ment pattern.  The  only  two  Siberian  peoples 
who  seem  to  meet  our  strict  definitionof  hunters 
and  gatherers  are  the  Ket  or  Yenisei  Ostyak,  on 
whom  we  have  a brief  sketch  by  Shimkin  ( 1 940) , 
and  the  Yukaghir,  on  whom  we  have  a full 
monograph  by  Jochelseon  (1926).  Both  tribes 
have  doubtless  been  so  altered  by  Soviet  accul- 
turation policies  that  further  field  work  among 
them  is  unlikely  to  yield  rewarding  results. 

7.  Indian  Hunters 

There  are  in  India  a number  of  hunting 
societies,  mostly  dependent  and  often  approxi- 
mating the  status  of  specialized  castes.  The 
fullest  ethnographic  account  is  probably  that 
by  Fiirer-Haimendorf  ( 1 943)  on  the  Dravidian- 
speaking  Chenchu,  but  Majumdar  (1944)  has 
contributed  a brief  account  of  the  Korwa  of 
Uttar  Pradesh.  B.  J.  Williams  describes  the 
Munda-speaking  Birhor  in  this  symposium 
(Chapter  14),  and  there  is  fragmentary  infor- 
mation on  the  Irula  and  Kurumba  of  the 
Nilgiri  Hills.  Peter  Gardner  has  provided  me 
with  a list  of  additional  Indian  hunting  groups : 
the  Kadar,  Malapandaram,  Paliyan,  and 
Yanadi,  all  of  whom  have  been  studied,  and 
the  still  undescribed  Allar,  Aranadan,  Eravallar, 
Mala  Vedan,  and  Vettuvan. 

8.  Veddoid  Hunters 

It  is  almost  certain  that  no  further  ethno- 
graphic information  of  consequence  is  obtain- 
able from  the  Rock  Vedda  of  Ceylon,  who  had 


Murdock  The  Current  Status  of  the  World’s  Hunting  and  Gathering  Peoples 


already  practically  disappeared  when  the 
Seligmans  ( 1 9 1 1 ) made  their  classic  study.  I 
agree  with  Gardner  that  the  Vedda  are  prob- 
ably a case  of  “devolution.”  The  Senoi  or 
Sakai  of  Malaya,  according  to  a personal  com- 
munication from  Robert  Dentan  on  the  basis 
of  his  recent  field  work  among  them,  have 
everywhere  adopted  a substantial  dependence 
upon  agriculture.  I have  no  recent  information 
on  the  peoples  of  Indonesia  who  have  been 
called  Veddoid,  very  probably  incorrectly,  and 
who  have  been  reported  to  practice  very  little 
agriculture,  such  as  the  Kubu  of  Sumatra 
(Hagen,  1908;  Schebesta,  1928)  and  the 
Punan  of  Borneo  (Furness,  1902;  Hose  and 
McDougall,  191 1 ; Roth,  1896). 

9.  Southeast  Asian  Hunters 

Participants  at  the  symposium  have  called  my 
attention  to  several  hunting  and  gathering 
peoples  in  Southeast  Asia  of  whom  I had 
previously  been  unaware.  Thus  Georges  Con- 
dominias  cites  the  Rue  of  central  Vietnam, 
Peter  Gardner  the  Penang  and  Phi  Tong 
Luang,  and  Lauriston  Sharp  the  Mrabri  or 
Yumbri  of  northern  Thailand.  The  References 
at  the  end  of  this  volume  include  the  following 
supplied  by  Sharp  on  the  Mrabri : Bodes  (1963), 
Flatz  (1963,  1964),  Kraisri  and  Hartland- 
Swann  (1962),  Velder  (1963,  1964). 

10.  Negritos 

Most  of  the  Negrito  tribes  of  the  Philippines 
practice  at  least  a modicum  of  agriculture  and 
thus  fall  outside  the  range  of  our  discussion. 
We  do,  however,  possess  substantial  accounts 
of  two  non-agricultural  Negrito  groups — the 
Andamanese  by  Man  (1883)  and  Radcliffe- 
Brown  (1933)  and  the  Semang  of  Malaya  by 
Evans  (1937)  and  Schebesta  (1929).  I suspect 
that  further  field  work  may  still  be  possible 
among  both  of  them. 

Oceania 

1 1 . Australian  Aborigines 

The  Tasmanians  are  long  since  extinct  (al- 
though new  ethnohistoric  materials  have 


17 

appeared:  Plomley,  1966),  and  the  peoples  of 
Melanesia,  Micronesia,  and  Polynesia  who 
lack  large  domestic  animals  and  depend  only 
minimally  on  agriculture  are  sedentary  in 
consequence  of  their  dependence  on  fishing, 
sago  gathering,  or  trade,  so  that  they  fall  out- 
side our  definition.  This  leaves  the  Australian 
aborigines  as  the  sole  surviving  representatives 
of  hunters  and  gatherers  in  Oceania.  Most  of 
them  have  either  disappeared  or  have  become 
strongly  acculturated.  Recent  work  among  the 
Tiwi,  in  Arnhem  Land,  on  Groote  Eylandt, 
and  elsewhere,  however,  demonstrates  that  the 
possibilities  for  productive  field  work  have  by 
no  means  been  yet  exhausted.  Substantial 
additional  information  on  the  Australian  indi- 
genes is  presented  by  Frederick  Rose  (Chapter 
21),  Aram  Yengoyan  (Chapter  20),  L.  R. 
Hiatt  (Chapters  10  and  18),  Mervyn  Meggitt 
(Chapter  19),  and  Arnold  Pilling  (Chapter  16) 
in  this  volume. 


Nort-h  America 

12.  Eskimo 

Field  research  among  the  Eskimo  has  exhibited 
a remarkable  spurt  in  recent  years.  Asen 
Balikci  (Chapter  8)  and  David  Damas  (Chap- 
ter 12,  this  volume)  present  some  of  the  results, 
which  are  perhaps  especially  illuminating  in 
the  field  of  social  organization.  Some  Eskimo 
groups  have  long  approximated  a sedentary 
mode  of  life  because  of  primary  dependence 
upon  the  products  of  the  sea,  and  others  have 
recently  been  approaching  this  status  because 
of  acculturative  influences.  The  majority,  how- 
ever, are  still  migratory  for  at  least  a part  of 
the  year,  and  a few  inland  groups  are  com- 
pletely divorced  from  the  sea.  Among  the 
latter  are  the  Nunamiut  of  northern  Alaska,  on 
whom  we  have  a recent  substantial  monograph 
by  Gubser  (1965). 

13.  Northeastern  Algonkians 

The  hunting  patterns  of  the  Algonkian  tribes 
of  eastern  Canada  were  clearly  modified  con- 
siderably with  the  development  of  the  fur 
trade.  The  available  information  is  relatively 
good,  though  the  input  of  new  information 


1 8 Introduction 


appears  to  be  dwindling.  Whenever  I begin  to 
suspect  that  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  is 
setting  in,  however,  I am  reassured  by  some 
significant  new  publication  from  the  pen  of 
Dunning  (1959),  Honigmann  (1962a,  1962b), 
or  Leacock  (1954). 

14.  Northwestern  Athapaskans 

A few  years  ago  it  appeared  that  the  potential 
ethnographic  crop  for  the  Athapaskan  tribes  of 
northwestern  Canada  and  interior  Alaska  had 
been  almost  completely  harvested  by  Osgood, 
Honigmann,  and  McKennan.  Appearances 
were  deceptive,  for  recently  we  have  had  a 
succession  of  monographs  and  articles  of  the 
very  highest  quality  from  June  Helm  (1961, 
1965a,  Helm  and  Lurie,  1961).  The  prospects 
for  further  productive  research  in  this  area 
thus  seem  by  no  means  closed. 

15.  Plateau  Indians 

The  Indians  of  the  Plateau  area  resemble  those 
of  the  adjacent  Northwest  coast  in  many  res- 
pects, notably  in  the  widespread  dependence 
upon  salmon  fishing,  but  they  devoted  con- 
siderably more  time  and  energy  to  seasonal 
migrations  in  search  of  roots,  berries,  and 
game.  New  information  is  still  appearing  in  a 
fairly  steady  stream,  though  much  of  it  is  per- 
haps supplementary  rather  than  fundamental. 
For  the  northern  tribes  of  the  area,  notably  the 
Lillooet  and  Shuswap,  I suspect  that  basic 
field  work  of  a quality  comparable  to  that  of 
Helm  on  the  Northern  Athapaskans  may  still 
be  possible  for  a number  of  years  to  come. 

16.  California  Indians 

Alfred  Kroeber  and  his  students,  both  through 
intensive  field  work  and  the  Culture  Element 
Survey,  have  probably  exhausted  most  of  the 
possibilities  for  fundamental  ethnographic  re- 
search among  the  tribes  of  the  California  area, 
so  that  only  fragmentary  information  remains 
to  be  recovered,  except  perhaps  across  the 
border  in  Baja  California. 

17.  The  Great  Basin 

The  prospects  seem  somewhat  better  for  the 
Shoshonean,  Yuman,  and  other  tribes  of  the 


Great  Basin.  My  basis  for  this  judgment  is  the 
surprising  amount  of  new  and  valuable  data 
which  eight  of  my  own  graduate  students  have 
brought  back  from  a summer  each  with  the 
field  training  program  conducted  for  the  past 
two  years  by  the  University  of  Nevada. 

18.  Gulf  Indians 

On  the  Indian  tribes  who  formerly  inhabited 
coastal  Texas  and  adjacent  northeastern 
Mexico — the  Karankawa,  Tonkawa,  Coahuil- 
teco,  etc. — we  possess  only  fragmentary  data, 
and  it  is  much  too  late  to  obtain  any  new  in- 
formation. It  is  interesting  to  note,  however, 
that  fairly  substantial  archival  material  is  be- 
ginning to  come  to  light  from  sixteenth-century 
Spanish  missionaries.  The  Drivers  (1963)  have 
recently  summarized  the  information  on  the 
Chichimeca-Jonaz,  and  Kimball  Romney  in- 
forms me  that  he  has  unearthed  remarkably 
full  kinship  data  on  the  Coahuilteco. 

19.  Apache 

Thirty  years  ago  Morris  Opler  was  able  to 
obtain  full  ethnographic  data  on  most  of  the 
Apache  tribes  of  the  Southwest,  by  no  means 
all  of  which  has  yet  been  published.  Field  work 
continues  in  this  area,  with  results  that  are  by 
no  means  always  disappointing. 

20.  Seri 

The  Seri  Indians  of  the  coast  of  Sonora  on  the 
Gulf  of  California  are  known  from  a famous  but 
partly  fanciful  monograph  by  McGee  (1898) 
and  from  a more  sober  sketch  by  Kroeber 
(1931),  both  unfortunately  based  on  extremely 
brief  field  trips.  During  the  symposium  Roger 
Owen  characterized  the  Seri  as  “one  of  the 
black  marks  on  American  ethnography”  and 
expressed  the  opinion  that  field  work  of  good 
quality  is  still  possible  among  them. 

South  America 

2 1 . Warrau 

As  Wilbert  (1958a)  has  demonstrated  in  a 
recent  monograph,  the  Warrau  Indians  of  the 


Murdock  The  Current  Status  of  the  World's  Hunting  and  Gathering  Peoples  1 9 


delta  of  the  Orinoco  River  still  adhere  in  large 
measure  to  an  essentially  aboriginal  mode  of 
life,  and  fundamental  field  work  of  high  quality 
is  still  possible  among  them. 

22.  Interior  Marginal 

T ribes  of  Southern  Venezuela 

The  so-called  “interior  marginal”  peoples  of 
southern  Venezuela  and  adjacent  Colombia 
and  Brazil  have  until  recently  remained  prac- 
tically unknown,  but  in  the  last  few  years  pre- 
liminary reports  have  appeared  on  such  tribes 
as  the  Guahibo,  Piaroa,  Sanema,  and  Shiriana, 
among  at  least  some  groups  of  which  agricul- 
ture is  absent  or  virtually  so  (Wilbert,  1958b, 
1966;  Migliazza,  1964).  These  reports  indicate 
that  fundamental  field  research  is  still  possible, 
and,  as  a matter  of  fact,  three  of  my  own 
graduate  students  have  been  working  recently 
among  the  Guahibo  (Morey,  1967). 

23.  Amazonian  Hunters 

As  regards  the  “interior  marginal”  tribes  of 
southwestern  Amazonia,  we  already  possess 
substantial  accounts  by  Holmberg  (1950)  on 
the  Siriono  and  by  Levi-Strauss  (1936,  1940) 
on  the  Bororo  and  Nambicuara,  and  the 
Guato  have  been  well  described  by  Schmidt 
(1905,  1942).  I understand,  too,  that  new 
material  of  high  quality  has  recently  become 
available  on  the  Guayaki  (Levi-Strauss,  this 
volume;  cf.  Bertoni,  1941;  Vellard,  1939). 

24.  East  Brazilian  Hunters 

The  non-agricultural  peoples  of  eastern  Brazil, 
of  whom  the  Botocudo,  Caingang,  and  Puri 
are  perhaps  the  best  known,  are  today  either 
extinct  or  shattered.  The  last  major  ethno- 
graphic report  from  this  area,  that  by  Henry 
(1941)  on  the  Aweikoma,  makes  it  clear  that 
fundamental  field  work  is  no  longer  possible 
here. 

25.  Gran  Chaco 

A fair  amount  of  information,  though  not  al- 
ways of  the  highest  quality,  is  available  on  the 
tribes  of  the  Gran  Chaco — the  Chamacoco, 
Choroti,  Mataco,  Mocovi,  Toba,  etc.  Though 


good  field  work  is  certainly  still  possible  in  this 
area,  the  aboriginal  situation  has  altered  sub- 
stantially through  the  adoption  of  agriculture, 
domestic  animals,  and  an  increasingly  'seden- 
tary mode  of  life  (Baldus,  1931;  Boggiani, 
1894;  Karsten,  1932;  Metraux,  1937;  Norden- 
skiold,  1919). 

26.  Ona 

The  Indians  of  the  Argentinian  steppe,  like 
those  of  the  Plains  of  North  America,  early 
adopted  the  horse  and  are  thus  as  mounted 
hunters  excluded  from  our  consideration. 
However,  their  kinsmen  in  the  extreme  south, 
the  Ona,  never  became  dependent  on  the 
horse  and  thus  qualify  for  inclusion.  We  are 
fortunate  in  having  a fairly  recent  and  ex- 
tremely comprehensive  account  of  the  Ona  by 
Gusinde  (1931-39). 

27.  Fuegians 

Finally,  we  must  list  the  Indians  of  the  extreme 
southwestern  tip  of  South  America — the 
Alacaluf,  Chono,  and  Yahgan — for  they  lived 
a migratory  life  despite  their  primary  depen- 
dence on  shellfish,  aquatic  mammals,  and  other 
products  of  the  sea.  The  Chono  are  ill  described 
and  extinct.  There  is  fuller  information  on  the 
Alacaluf  and  especially  the  Yahgan,  but  both 
tribesare  now  reduced  to  tinyremnants,  and  the 
prospects  of  obtaining  further  fundamental  des- 
criptive material  are  therefore  extremely  slim. 

By  way  of  concluding  this  rapid  survey  of  the 
world’s  hunting  and  gathering  peoples  who 
have  survived  long  enough  to  be  studied  by 
modern  anthropologists,  I should  like  to  stress 
the  fact  that  their  largest  concentration  is  found 
in  aboriginal  North  America,  where  they  have 
been  studied  mainly  by  American  and 
Canadian  anthropologists.  The  publications  of 
these  scholars  are  thus  especially  crucial  for  any 
general  or  comparative  study  of  the  material 
culture  and  subsistence  economy  of  hunting 
and  gathering  peoples. 

Second,  the  great  majority  of  these  North 
American  societies  are  characterized  by  social 
systems  of  a bilateral  rather  than  unilineal  type, 
and  indeed  constitute  well  over  half  of  the 
known  bilateral  societies  of  the  entire  world,  so 


20  Introduction 


that  they  are  equally  crucial  for  the  compara- 
tive study  of  this  rapidly  expanding  aspect  of 
social  organization.  It  is  thus  entirely  under- 
standable why  people  like  Damas,  Dunning, 
and  Helm  have  recently  been  concentrating  on 
this  range  of  problems  in  their  North  American 
researches. 

Finally,  owing  to  the  influence  of  Lewis 
Henry  Morgan,  North  American  ethno- 
graphers have  paid  special  attention  to  kinship 
terminology  and  its  social  concomitants  for 


several  generations.  As  a consequence,  we  pos- 
sess reasonably  adequate  kinship  information 
on  perhaps  85  per  cent  of  all  the  North 
American  tribes  whom  the  white  man  has  ever 
encountered,  as  contrasted  with  a comparable 
figure  of  not  more  than  15  per  cent  for  the 
known  tribes  of  Africa.  Thus,  future  field  re- 
search in  this  continent,  despite  the  steadily 
decreasing  range  of  its  geographical  possi- 
bilities, can  be  based  on  an  exceptionally  solid 
background  of  past  accomplishment. 


Part  II 

Ecology  and  Economics 


3- 


The  “Hunting”  Economies 

of  the  Tropical  Forest  Zone  of  South  America: 

An  Attempt  at  Historical  Perspective 


DONALD  W.  LATHRAP 


The  Amazon  Easin  contains  the  largest  block 
of  tropical  rain  forest  in  the  world.  The  pat- 
terns of  human  utilization  of  this  region  and  the 
history  of  how  these  patterns  evolved  through 
time  is  of  considerable  interest  as  a major  chap- 
ter in  the  progressive  expansion  of  human 
populations,  and  in  the  adaptation  of  such 
populations  to  diverse  ecological  settings.1 

At  the  time  of  the  first  European  contact,  the 
Amazon  Basin  showed  a considerable  range  of 
cultural  pattern  in  terms  of  size  and  complexity 
of  social  units,  complexity  of  material  culture, 
and  even  in  basic  patterns  of  subsistence  ac- 
tivity. The  flood  plain  of  the  main  stream  of  the 
Amazon  and  of  its  major  tributaries  sustained 
large,  sedentary  populations  engaged  in  in- 
tensive root-crop  farming  combined  with  fish- 
ing and  the  hunting  of  aquatic  mammals  and 
reptiles.  The  exact  size  and  complexity  of 
sociopolitical  units  attained  by  these  riverine 
societies,  as  of  a.d.  i 500,  continues  to  be  a mat- 
ter of  controversy  since  all  such  societies  were 
very  early  disrupted  by  the  effects  of  slave 

1.  This  paper  is  a somewhat  expanded  version  of  the 
presentation  given  at  the  symposium.  It  has  benefited 
from  the  symposium  discussions,  and  through  advice 
given  by  my  wife  Joan  W.  Lathrap  and  Dr.  Frederic  K. 
Lehman. 


raiding,  missionization,  and  diseases  intro- 
duced by  the  Europeans.  While  it  is  clear  that 
none  of  these  societies  rivaled  the  kind  of  socio- 
political unit  which  had  been  typical  of  the 
central  Andes  for  the  last  500  to  1,000  years 
before  Columbus,  it  is  equally  clear  from  the 
various  reviews  of  the  early  sources  (Metraux, 
1948a;  Nimuendaju,  1952a;  Palmatary,  i960, 
1965;  Rowe,  1952)  that  such  riverine  groups 
were  far  larger  and  more  complex  than  the 
presently  surviving  remnant  groups  represent- 
ing tropical  forest  culture.  An  even  greater  dis- 
crepancy exists  between  our  knowledge  of  the 
contact  period  riverine  societies  of  the  Amazon 
Basin  and  the  generalized  notion  of  “tropical 
forest  culture”  or  “tropical  forest  stage”  which 
has  been  developed  by  Meggers  and  Evans 
(Meggers,  1954,  1957a,  1957b;  Meggers  and 
Evans,  1956). 

The  demographic  and  cultural  situation  in 
the  slightly  elevated  regions  between  the  major 
rivers  was  in  sharp  contrast  to  that  of  the  flood 
plains.  The  interfluve  areas  were  characterized 
by  scant  populations  organized  into  small, 
widely  dispersed  and  mobile  social  units.  These 
groups  typically  showed  simple  and  relatively 
unproductive  agricultural  systems  and  relied 
heavily  on  the  hunting  of  terrestrial  and 


23 


24  Ecology  and  Economics 

arboreal  game  for  their  sustenance.  Unlike  the 
groups  inhabiting  the  more  accessible  and 
economically  more  valuable  floodplains,  the 
simple,  dispersed  Indian  societies  of  the  inter- 
fluve have  in  many  instances  survived  until 
recently  without  major  modifications  in  culture 
(Carneiro,  1964,  p.  g).J 

The  presentation  of  a full,  composite  ethno- 
graphic picture  of  all  such  simple  non-riverine 
groups  is  far  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper, 
but  certain  key  points  in  the  above  generaliza- 
tions should  be  documented.  In  the  area  with 
which  I am  most  familiar,  the  Peruvian 
Montana,  groups  such  as  the  Cashibo,  Ama- 
huaca,  Remo,  and  Mayoruna  are  completely 
characteristic.  A recent  comparison  of  the 
agricultural  practices  of  the  Isconahua  group 
of  Remo,  with  those  of  the  Shipibo,  a riverine 
Panoan  group,  has  shown  the  relative  ineffi- 
ciency of  the  Remo  system  and  suggested  that 
this  inefficiency  was  an  adjustment  to  the 
poorer  agricultural  potential  of  the  interfluvial 
zone,  the  Remo’s  accustomed  habitat  (Mom- 
sen,  1964,  pp.  76-77).  Carneiro’s  excellent 
discussion  of  Amahuaca  agriculture  indicates 
equally  rudimentary  practices.  For  instance, 
he  says:  “At  best,  the  Amahuaca  are  reluctant 
weeders”  (1964,  p.  14).  The  Shipibo  on  the 
other  hand  appear  to  be  rather  systematic  and 
finicky  on  these  matters. 

Points  which  are  crucial  to  the  present  dis- 
cussion are  the  great  importance  which  the 
hunting  of  terrestrial  and  arboreal  game  had 
for  these  interfluvial  groups,  and  the  degree  to 
which  the  dependence  on  such  game  affected 
all  other  aspects  of  their  culture.  Carneiro  has 
repeatedly  demonstrated  (i960,  1961,  1964) 
that  it  is  not  agricultural  potential  which 
directly  controls  the  size  and  mobility  of 
tropical  forest  social  groups.  In  the  Amahuaca 
case  he  gives  a clear  demonstration  that  the 
agriculture  system,  rudimentary  as  it  is,  is  still 
capable  of  producing  far  more  vegetable  foods 
than  the  people  are  able  to  use  (1964,  pp.  17- 
18).  It  is  the  absence  of  significant  aquatic 
resources  (1964,  p.  10)  leading  to  a depen- 
dence on  terrestrial  hunting  for  the  protein 

2.  In  view  of  the  discussion  which  followed  the  pre- 
sentation of  this  paper,  it  is  perhaps  advisable  to  make 
explicit  that  the  Ge  and  Bororo  groups  of  the  east  Brazil 
highlands  fall  outside  the  territorial  and  ecological  limits 
set  for  this  paper. 


necessary  to  the  diet  which  largely  controls  the 
nature  of  the  social  group.  Carneiro  is  worth 
quoting  at  length  on  this  point: 

First  of  all,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  the 
Amahuaca  are  still  hunters  almost  as  much  as 
they  are  gardeners.  Consequently,  considerations 
having  to  do  with  the  availability  of  game  are 
very  important  to  them.  Even  though  three  or 
four  families  settled  in  one  locale  for  a year  do 
not  hunt  out  the  game  animals  within  the  usual 
hunting  radius  of  the  settlement,  they  neverthe- 
less probably  make  a noticeable  inroad  in  their 
numbers.  By  the  end  of  a year  it  has  become 
necessary  to  walk  farther  to  find  game,  and  this 
is  a decided  inconvenience.  If  this  inconvenience 
were  counterbalanced  by  an  equal  or  greater 
inconvenience  in  building  a new  settlement  each 
year,  the  Amahuaca  might  not  move  so  frequently. 
But  Amahuaca  houses  can  be  built  in  three  days 
and  Amahuaca  families  are  independent  units 
perfectly  free  to  pick  up  and  move  when  and 
where  they  want  to.  Thus  the  Amahuaca,  in 
deciding  to  move  their  settlements,  do  not  have 
to  overcome  the  inertia  that  would  face  a society 
which  had  a large  village,  substantial  houses,  and 
centralized  political  authority.  In  short,  since  the 
resistance  to  moving  is  small,  the  forces  required 
to  bring  it  about  can  likewise  be  small  ( 1 964,  p.  16). 

Holmberg  ( 1 950)  paints  a far  bleaker  picture 
of  the  results  of  the  necessary  dependence  on 
terrestrial  hunting  by  such  interfluvial  groups. 
While  probably  somewhat  extreme  in  terms  of 
the  average  situation  for  such  groups  through- 
out the  Amazon  Basin,  his  description  of 
hunger  and  life  among  the  Siriono  still  stands 
as  the  most  detailed  coverage  of  the  kind  of 
economic  patterns  shared  by  such  groups. 

A final  factor  which  characterized  the  primi- 
tive groups  on  the  interriverine  uplands  is  that 
they  were  typically  denied  access  to  the  flood 
plain  environment  by  the  warlike  activities  of 
the  riverine  groups.  It  was  the  continual  threat 
of  slave  raiding,  head  taking,  and  in  some 
instances  cannibalism  which  held  the  non- 
riverine  groups  in  their  less  favorable  environ- 
ment. Nimuendaju’s  discussion  of  the  territory 
of  the  Tukuna  illustrates  the  point  admirably: 

The  Tukuna  did  not  then  inhabit  the  banks  of 
the  Amazon-Solimoes,  for  fear  of  the  Omagua, 


Lathrap  The  “ Hunting ” Economies  of  the  Tropical  Forest  Zone  of  South  America  25 


who  occupied  the  islands  of  that  river  throughout 
its  course  in  Tukuna  territory  and  even  far 
beyond,  while  the  banks  of  the  Putumayo-I^a 
were  held  by  Aruak  tribes — the  Mariate, 
Yumana,  and  Pase  (1952b,  p.  8). 

The  most  feared  enemies  of  the  ancient  Tukuna 
— one  might  say  their  only  enemies — were  the 
Omagua.  [The  Omagua]  attacked  by  canoe, 
with  great  spears.  They  captured  many:  some  of 
them  were  sacrificed  to  their  idols  and  the  rest 
served  as  slaves  in  their  husbandary  (1952b,  p. 

65)- 

Marcoy’s  general  discussion  of  the  attitude 
of  the  riverine  Shipibo  toward  the  non-riverine 
Cashibo  is  equally  telling,  and  his  description 
of  the  crucifixion  of  a Cashibo  unfortunate 
enough  to  fall  into  Shipibo  hands  is  even  more 
graphic  (1873,  vol.  2,  pp.  162-63). 

Concerning  the  relation  between  the  riverine 
Arawakanand  Tucanoan  tribes  of  southeastern 
Colombia  and  the  interfluvial  Macu,  Metraux 
says: 

The  Arawakan  and  Tucanoan  tribes  of  the  upper 
Rio  Negro,  Caiari-Uaupes,  and  Tiquit;  Rivers 
have  since  time  immemorial  waged  merciless  war 
against  the  Macu,  whom  they  enslave  or  reduce 
to  serfdom.  Some  small  groups  of  Macu  come  to 
work  for  the  sedentary  Uanana  and  Desana  and, 
after  a few  months,  disappear  again  into  the 
bush.  The  Tucano  of  the  Tiqui£  River  subjected 
a large  group  of  Macu  to  their  rule,  but  on  the 
slightest  suspicion  of  sorcery,  they  were  prompt 
to  attack  them  and  sell  their  captives  to  the 
Whites  (1948b,  p.  866). 

Carneiro  also  alludes  to  the  constant  hostility 
between  the  Amahuaca  and  their  riverine 
neighbors  as  a factor  tending  to  maintain  their 
small,  highly  mobile,  social  units  (1964,  p.  16). 

It  is  the  culturally  simple  groups  of  the 
slightly  elevated  interfluvial  regions  of  the 
Amazon  Basin  who  are  of  possible  interest  to 
this  symposium.  It  is  clear  from  the  foregoing 
discussion  that  they  are  typically  dependent  on 
the  hunting  of  terrestrial  and  arboreal  game  for 
the  essential  protein  complement  of  their  diet, 
and  arguments  have  been  presented  suggesting 
that  the  hunting  practices  of  such  people  are  a 
more  important  factor  in  conditioning  their 


total  way  of  life  than  are  their  relatively  rudi- 
mentary and  inefficient  agricultural  systems. 

There  has  been  a tendency  to  treat  these 
people  as  unmodified  representatives  of  a very 
early  and  primitive  stage  of  tropical  forest 
culture.  Thus  in  a recent  description  of  the 
Isconahua  group  of  Remo,  we  find  the 
authors,  Whiton,  Greene,  and  Momsen  saying: 
“Their  culture  was  that  of  incipient  tropical 
forest  slash-and-burn  and  close  to  neolithic 
man”  (1964,  p.  123).  The  suggestion  has  also 
been  made  that  some,  perhaps  most,  of  these 
peoples  represent  groups  of  primitive  hunters 
only  slightly  modified  by  trait-unit  diffusion 
from  their  more  advanced  agricultural  neigh- 
bors, and  thus  show  a large  degree  of  cultural 
continuity  from  a pre-Neolithic  period  or  stage. 
Metraux  is  explicit  about  such  an  interpreta- 
tion (1948b,  p.  861),  while  such  a view  appears 
implicit  in  most  of  Steward’s  discussion  of  the 
same  problem  (1948b,  pp.  896-99).  Some  such 
view  would  also  appear  to  be  implicit  in 
Needham’s  emphasis  on  the  anomaly  of  a 
system  of  asymmetric  prescriptive  alliances 
occurring  in  a “small-scale,  hunting  and  col- 
lectingsociety”  such  as  the  Siriono  ( 1 961 , p.  252) . 

There  is  reason  to  question  both  of  these 
interpretations  and  to  suggest  that  many,  per- 
haps all,  of  these  simpler  and  less  sedentary 
groups  are  the  degraded  descendants  of  peoples 
who  at  one  time  maintained  an  advanced  form 
of  tropical  forest  culture.  In  the  remainder  of 
this  paper  I hope  to  develop  a simplified 
model  of  the  historical  background  of  such 
peoples. 

I will  assume  that  man  entered  South 
America  with  an  economy  oriented  toward  the 
hunting  of  big  game,  the  large  grazing  animals 
typical  of  the  grasslands  and  savannah.  If  the 
earliest  inhabitants  of  South  America  indeed 
did  function  as  predators  on  the  grazing  fauna, 
it  is  unlikely  that  they  initially  would  have 
extended  their  range  beyond  that  of  the  major 
element  of  their  subsistence. 

Such  hunting  groups  appear  to  have  entered 
South  America  before  15,000  b.g.  (Rouse  and 
Cruxent,  1963a,  p.  537)  and  to  have  extended 
their  range  to  the  Straits  of  Magellen  by 
9000  b.c.  (Lanning  and  Hammel,  1961,  p.  147). 
There  is  insufficient  space  to  review  the 
distribution  of  Late  Pleistocene  and  Early 


26  Ecology  and  Economics 

Post-Pleistocene  sitesin  South  America,  but  the 
available  evidence  is  compatible  with  the  hypo- 
thesis that  the  earlier  occupations  were 
confined  to  areas  of  relatively  open  vegetation: 
seasonal  grasslands,  high  grasslands,  open 
thorn  forest,  etc. 

For  groups  with  a technology  and  social 
system  well  adapted  to  cooperative  hunting  on 
the  grassland,  the  tropical  forest  would  not 
have  been  an  attractive  environment  for 
permanent  occupation  or  intensive  utilization. 
The  more  common  forms  of  game,  both 
animals  and  birds,  had  as  their  typical  habitat 
the  upper  levels  of  the  forest  canopy  or  were 
semi-aquatic  to  aquatic.  In  terms  of  mam- 
malian fauna,  the  floor  of  the  tropical  forest 
away  from  the  rivers  supported  a poverty  of 
species  and  a low  density  of  individuals.  Gil- 
more comments  on  the  generally  unfavorable 
nature  of  the  tropical  forest  as  a hunting  terri- 
tory (1950,  p.  354),  and  information  on  groups 
such  as  the  Siriono  suggests  that  even  for  a 
people  with  a technology  specifically  adapted 
to  the  problems  of  hunting  within  the  tropical 
forest,  the  tropical  forest  is  far  from  prime 
hunting  territory. 

One  would  expect  that  most  of  the  areas  of 
more  open  vegetation  including  the  east  Brazil 
highlands,  the  llanos  of  Venezuela  and  Colom- 
bia, and  parts  of  the  Guiana  highlands  would 
have  been  occupied  before  groups  with  a speci- 
fically hunting  orientation  would  have  at- 
tempted a direct  penetration  of  the  central 
block  of  tropical  forest  within  the  Amazon 
Basin.  Indeed,  there  is  no  direct  archeological 
evidence  that  such  penetration  ever  took  place. 
The  earliest  demonstrable  penetration  of  the 
tropical  forest  of  the  Amazon  Basin  is  oriented 
to  the  far  richer  riverine  resources. 

The  more  astute  students  of  tropical  forest 
culture,  such  as  Sauer,  Lowie,  Steward,  and 
Goldman,  have  all  observed  that  tropica!  forest 
culture  is  less  an  adaptation  to  the  forest  as 
such,  than  to  the  riverine  environment  within 
the  tropical  forest.  Since  this  point  has  been 
consistently  ignored  by  those  who  tend  to  see 
the  tropical  forest  as  a uniform  environment,  it 
may  be  well  to  offer  extensive  documentation. 
Sauer’s  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  riverine 
resources  suffuses  his  whole  discussion  of  the 
origin  of  the  tropical  forest  pattern  of  cultiva- 
tion (1952,  pp.  40-49).  And  Lowie  comments: 


At  the  core  of  the  area  the  diagnostic  features 
are:  the  cultivation  of  tropical  root  crops, 

especially  bitter  manioc;  effective  river  craft;  the 
use  of  hammocks  as  beds;  and  the  manufacture 
of  pottery. 

The  very  wide  distribution  of  certain  traits  in 
the  area  is  correlated  with  navigation.  Thanks  to 
their  mobility,  the  canoeing  tribes  were  able  to 
maintain  themselves  in  the  midst  of  boatless 
populations,  to  travel  with  ease  over  periodically 
inundated  tracts,  and  to  diffuse  their  arts  and 
customs  over  enormous  distances  (1948,  p.  1). 

Steward  makes  the  same  points  even  more 
strongly : 

The  distribution  of  culture  elements  and  com- 
plexes reveals  at  least  one  broad  pattern.  The 
basic  Tropical  Forest  cultures  occur  mainly  in 
the  areas  accessible  by  water  routes,  both  the 
coast  and  the  great  rivers.  . . . The  inference  is 
clear  that  what  is  thought  of  as  a typical  Tropical 
Forest  or  selvan  culture — a developed  agriculture 
and  a technology  manifest  in  twilled  and  woven 
baskets,  loom  weaving,  cotton  hammocks,  cera- 
mics, and  other  material  traits — flowed  along 
the  coast  and  up  the  main  waterways  stopping 
where  streams  were  less  navigable  . . . (1948b, 
p.  883). 

Goldman’s  statement  of  the  Cubeos’  view  of 
their  ecological  setting  has  an  almost  poetic 
force : 

The  river  forms  a wider  community  of  related 
sibs.  With  some  exceptions  the  sibs  have  aligned 
themselves  along  a river  on  the  basis  of  degree  of 
closeness  and  of  rank.  Sibs  that  have  segmented 
from  a parental  sib  ordinarily  occupy  an  adjacent 
site.  The  river  is  the  most  important  territory.  It 
is  a highway  and  a link  between  related  sibs,  the 
source  of  ancestral  power,  and  the  economic  zone 
of  the  men,  fish  being  the  main  source  of  animal 
protein.  Even  most  land  animals  are  hunted  along 
the  river  banks. 

The  orientation  of  the  Cubeo  is  toward  the 
river  and  not  toward  the  forest.  Whereas  the 
forest  is  undifferentiated  terrain,  the  rivers  are 
known  to  every  turn  and  outcrop  of  rock  or 
other  feature.  The  river  is  the  source  of  the  an- 
cestral powers,  of  benefits  as  well  as  of  dangers.  The 
forest  is  a source  mainly  of  dangers  (1963,  p.  44). 


Lathrap  The  “ Hunting ” Economies  of  the  Tropical  Forest  fone  of  South  America  27 


The  advantages  of  the  riverine  environment 
over  the  slightly  elevated  interriverine  zone 
include  not  only  the  greater  availability  of 
animal  protein,  but  also  a much  higher  agri- 
cultural potential.  Sauer  discusses  the  differ- 
ence between  the  two  zones  in  terms  of  land 
form  (1950,  p.  324),  while  Sternberg  stresses 
the  very  real  difference  in  agricultural  potential 
of  the  lands  lying  within  the  Amazon  Basin: 

Or  take  the  prospect  of  an  unlimited  extent  of 
rich  crop  land.  The  luxurious  forest  which 
mantles  most  of  the  region  has  commonly  been 
interpreted  as  an  unconditional  promise  of  inex- 
haustible fertility.  The  very  real  productivity  of 
bottomlands,  periodically  flooded  and  rejuvenated 
with  silt-laden  waters,  has  thus  been  ascribed  to 
the  enormous  area  corresponding  to  the  generally 
acid  and  poor  soils  of  the  terras  firmas,  or 
uplands  (1964,  p.  13). 

Thus  it  cannot  be  too  strongly  emphasized 
that  the  deep  alluvial  soils  within  the  active 
flood  plains  have  a far  greater  agricultural 
potential  than  the  laterized  and  heavily 
eroded  soils  on  the  slightly  elevated  uplands 
back  from  the  rivers.  My  Shipibo  friends  in- 
form me  that  such  deep,  alluvial  soils  in  certain 
parts  of  the  central  Ucayali  flood  plain  will 
support  continuous  root-crop  agriculture  for 
up  to  fifteen  or  twenty  years. 

Sauer  has  stressed  that  the  tropical  forest 
agricultural  pattern  is  essentially  one  of  carbo- 
hydrate production,  with  the  fat  and  protein 
requirements  of  the  diet  supplied  by  a tech- 
nologically sophisticated  utilization  of  the  pro- 
digious fish,  aquatic  mammal,  and  aquatic 
reptile  resources  of  the  flood  plain  (1952). 
Evolved  tropical  forest  culture  involves  not  just 
developed  root-crop  agriculture,  but  a de- 
veloped set  of  fishing  practices,  including  fish 
poisoning  and  effective  water  craft.  Archeo- 
logical manifestations  suggesting  all  of  these 
accomplishments  appear  early  along  the  major 
rivers  within  the  Amazon  Basin. 

Along  the  flood  plain  of  the  central  Ucayali 
River  in  the  Montana  of  eastern  Peru  we  find 
remains  of  such  cultures  as  early  as  2000  B.c. 
(Lathrap,  1958;  1962;  1965a,  pp.  797-98; 
1965b,  p.  12).  The  elaborate  and  technologi- 
cally sophisticated  ceramic  style  designated 
Early  Tutishcainyo  cannot  be  derived  from  any 


early  central  Andean  ceramic  style.  It  does, 
however,  show  certain  basic  similarities  to  the 
earliest  examples  of  tropical  forest  culture 
known  from  the  flood  plains  of  the  Lower 
Orinoco  in  Venezuela,  suggesting  that  both 
ceramic  styles  may  have  derived  from  some 
common  source  along  the  intermediate  net- 
work of  rivers  (Cruxent  and  Rouse,  1959; 
Lathrap,  1963;  Rouse  and  Cruxent,  1963b). 
The  geographical  setting  in  the  central  Ucayali 
presents  the  grossest  kinds  of  obstacles  to  a 
meaningful  estimate  of  settlement  pattern  and 
density  ofoccupation  for  the  earliest  complexes. 
Given  the  degree  to  which  jungle  litter  tends  to 
camouflage  all  land  surfaces,  given  the  fact  that 
the  activity  of  the  more  numerous  colonial  ants 
tends  to  bury  all  ancient  land  surfaces  under 
three  to  six  inches  of  culturally  sterile  deposit, 
and  most  importantly  given  the  destructive 
power  of  the  continually  meandering  river 
which  erases  all  traces  of  early  settlements  not 
located  at  the  precise  edge  of  the  flood  plain, 
the  available  evidence  suggests  that  Early 
Tutishcainyo  already  represents  a dense  occu- 
pation of  the  suitable  ecological  niche. 

In  the  course  of  the  long  cultural  sequence 
which  follows  Early  Tutishcainyo  on  the  cen- 
tral LIcayali  there  exists  evidence  for  at  least 
three  instances  of  complete  ethnic  replace- 
ment; two  of  the  intrusive  ceramic  styles,  so 
strongly  suggesting  the  entrance  of  new  ethnic 
groups,  are  clearly  derived  from  the  central 
Amazon.  The  long  archeological  sequence  on 
the  central  Ucayali  fully  substantiates  the 
picture  of  cultural  development  which  Steward 
sketched  on  the  basis  of  ethnographic  distri- 
bution alone: 

Culturally,  the  Chuncho  (the  Indians  of  the 
Montana)  belong  with  the  Tropical  Forest 
peoples.  They  appear  to  represent  a series  of 
migratory  waves  that  had  spent  their  force 
against  the  barrier  of  the  Andes,  where  repre- 
sentatives of  many  widely  distributed  linguistic 
families  . . . subsided  into  comparative  isolation 
(1948a,  p.  507). 

A series  of  waves  of  migration,  basically  in 
an  upstream  direction,  is  also  suggested  by  the 
distribution  of  languages  in  two  of  the  more 
fully  studied  South  American  linguistic  stocks, 
Macro- Arawak  and  Tupi-Guarani.  Noble 


28  Ecology  and  Economics 

(1965)  has  presented  a detailed  reconstruction 
of  the  proto-language  of  Macro-Arawakan  in- 
cluding estimates  of  the  degree  of  relationship 
among  the  various  languages  within  Macro- 
Arawakan.  Rodrigues(  1958)  has  presented  a 
brief  statement  as  to  the  classification  of  the 
various  Tupi-Guarani  languages.  A full  treat- 
ment of  the  significance  of  these  classifications 
for  the  understanding  of  South  American  cul- 
ture history  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper, 
but  I am  at  present  engaged  in  preparing  a 
manuscript  which  will  attempt  to  evaluate  the 
distribution  of  the  languages  of  these  two 
stocks  in  terms  of  past  population  movements. 
In  attempting  to  summarize  what  is  a complex 
picture,  one  might  say  that  the  more  divergent, 
and  presumably  more  anciently  dispersed 
branches  of  Macro-Arawakan  tend  to  be  near 
the  headwaters  of  the  major  western  tributaries 
of  the  Amazon,  while  the  more  closely  related 
Maipuran  languages  within  Arawakan  tend  to 
dominate  the  mainstreams  of  the  western  seg- 
ment of  the  Amazon,  the  Rio  Negro,  and  the 
Orinoco.  Likewise  the  more  divergent  branches 
of  Tupi-Guarani  are  ranged  near  the  head- 
waters of  the  various  major  southern  tributaries 
of  the  Amazon,  while  the  more  closely  related 
languages  within  the  family  dominate  the 
broader  flood  plains  of  the  lower  reaches  of 
these  rivers,  much  of  the  mainstream  of  the 
Lower  Amazon,  the  Atlantic  coast  of  Brazil, 
and  much  of  the  flood  plain  of  the  Parana. 
The  most  economical  explanation  for  these  ob- 
servations (especially  when  they  are  coupled 
with  Noble’s  demonstration  of  an  ultimate  re- 
lationship between  Proto-Arawakan  and  Proto- 
Tupi-Guarani,  relating  to  a period  before  the 
dispersal  of  these  two  stocks)  would  be  that  the 
proto-languages  of  the  two  stocks  occupied  ad- 
jacent stretched  of  the  Central  Amazon  between 
3000  and  2000  B.c.  with  Proto-Arawakan  on  the 
upstream  side.  From  this  hearth,  colonization 
spread  outward,  mainly  in  an  upstream  direc- 
tion, along  all  available  waterways.  Certain 
marked  congruences  between  the  distribution 
of  ceramic  styles  and  the  distributions  of  par- 
ticular linguistic  families  or  subfamilies  suggest 
the  possibility  of  indicating  the  archeological 
concomitants  of  these  major  migrations  demon- 
strable on  linguistic  grounds,  and  I hope  fully 
to  explore  this  possibility  in  the  aforementioned 
forthcoming  book  J 


The  pattern  of  outward  migration  suggested 
by  all  of  these  converging  lines  of  evidence 
could  best  be  explained  by  intense  and  con- 
tinuing population  pressures  of  the  flood  plain 
of  the  Central  Amazon,  the  most  favorable 
environment  for  the  support  of  tropical  forest 
culture.  Such  continuous  expansion  by  groups 
moving  out  to  colonize  further  areas  of  flood 
plain  progressively  pushed  smaller  or  militarily 
weaker  groups  farther  upstream  or  off  the  flood 
plains  entirely.  In  presenting  this  view  I am, 
of  course,  in  complete  accord  with  Vayda’s 
argument  that  warfare  among  tropical  forest 
farmers  has  profound  economic  and  demo- 
graphic effects  even  though  it  may  have  a 
religious  or  recreational  rationale  (Vayda, 
1961b). 

This  extreme  and  continuing  competition 
for  territory  is  understandable,  if  one  realizes 
the  limited  amount  of  flood  plain — the  only 
ecological  niche  really  suitable  to  tropical  forest 
culture — available  in  the  Amazon  Basin. 
Sternberg  summarizes  the  point  nicely: 

It  has  been  seen  how  the  uplands  are  generally 
poor,  and  it  must  be  granted  that  they  occupy 
the  major  part  of  the  Amazon  region,  comprising 
more  than  a million  square  miles  and  leaving  only 
a slight  fraction  of  the  area  to  the  fertile  varzeas, 
or  floodplains.  Nevertheless,  one  is  dealing  with 
lands  of  continental  dimensions  and  this  small 
fraction  represents  no  insignificant  area:  the 
varzeas , rejuvenated  every  year  by  the  silt  brought 
down  by  the  river,  occupy  some  twenty-five 
thousand  square  miles  . . . (1964,  p.  324). 

Considering  that  these  processes  have  been 
continuous  from  about  2500  b.c.  up  to  the  time 
of  the  contact,  it  is  clear  that  a large  number  of 


3.  Readers  familiar  with  the  literature  on  South 
American  archeology  will  know  that  Meggers  and  Evans 
have  presented  a markedly  different  model  of  demo- 
graphy and  population  movements  in  the  Amazon 
Basin  (1961).  Other  archeologists  who  have  worked 
under  their  close  supervision  have  followed  the  Meggers- 
Evans  hypotheses  rather  slavishly  (for  example,  Hilbert, 
1962a,  1962b).  That  the  Meggers-Evans  model  is  not 
mentioned  in  the  text  of  this  paper  does  not  indicate 
that  lam  ignorant  of  its  existence.  Rather  I find  that  all 
of  the  data  presented  by  Meggers,  Evans,  and  Hilbert, 
as  opposed  to  their  speculation  about  the  data,  can  be 
accommodated  quite  easily  in  my  own  model. 


Lathrap  The  “ Hunting ” Economies  of  the  Tropical  Forest  fone  of  South  America  29 


ethnic  groups  were  forced  off  the  flood  plains 
into  less  favorable  environments. 

Most  of  the  primitive  groups  inhabiting  the 
tropical  forest  uplands  away  from  the  major 
flood  plains  can  be  interpreted  as  the  wreckage 
of  evolved  agricultural  societies  forced  into  an 
environment  unsuitable  to  the  basic  economic 
pattern.  Deprived  of  the  riverine  resources, 
such  groups  had  to  rely  on  the  hunting  of  forest 
game  to  provide  the  protein  and  fat  essential 
to  the  diet.  A more  intense  orientation  to  hunt- 
ing the  relatively  scarce  game  available  led  to 
more  nomadism,  a decline  in  agricultural 
productivity,  and  a still  greater  dependence  on 
wild  food. 

I am  convinced  that  this  picture  accounts  for 
all  the  simpler  groups  within  Tupi-Guarani, 
Arawakan,  and  Panoan  linguistic  stocks. 


As  we  gain  more  knowledge  the  interpretation 
may  be  extendable  to  other  groups,  whose  cul- 
tural and  linguistic  affiliations  are  less  clear, 
such  as  the  Tukuna,  Mura,  and  Macu.  The 
speed  with  which  this  kind  of  cultural  devolu- 
tion can  take  place  is  suggested  by  the  relatively 
minor  linguistic  differences  between  the  river- 
ine Panoans  such  as  the  Shipibo  and  Conibo 
and  the  very  “primitive”  interfluvial  Panoan 
groups  such  as  the  Cashibo  and  Remo. 

While  the  “hunting”  cultures  of  the  tropical 
forest  zone  of  South  America  offer  highly  ex- 
plicit examples  of  the  cultural  and  demo- 
graphic effects  of  a dependence  on  hunting  in 
an  area  where  hunting  is  neither  profitable  or 
easy,  they  probably  instruct  us  not  at  all 
about  the  nature  of  pre-Neolithic  hunting 
cultures. 


4 


What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living, 

or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 

RICHARD  B.  LEE 


The  current  anthropological  view  of  hunter- 
gatherer  subsistence  rests  on  two  questionable 
assumptions.  First  is  the  notion  that  these 
peoples  are  primarily  dependent  on  the  hunt- 
ing of  game  animals,  and  second  is  the  assump- 
tion that  their  way  of  life  is  generally  a 
precarious  and  arduous  struggle  for  existence. 

Recent  data  on  living  hunter-gatherers 
(Meggitt,  1964b;  Service,  1966;  and  papers  in 
this  volume)  show  a radically  different  picture. 
We  have  learned  that  in  many  societies,  plant 
and  marine  resources  are  far  more  important 
than  are  game  animals  in  the  diet.  More  im- 
portant, it  is  becoming  clear  that,  with  a few 
conspicuous  exceptions,  the  hunter-gatherer 
subsistence  base  is  at  least  routine  and  reliable 
and  at  best  surprisingly  abundant.  Anthro- 
pologists have  consistently  tended  to  under- 
estimate the  viability  of  even  those  “marginal 
isolates”  of  hunting  peoples  that  have  been 
available  to  ethnographers. 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  analyze  the 
food  getting  activities  of  one  such  “marginal” 
people,  the  IKung  Bushmen  of  the  Kalahari 
Desert.  Three  related  questions  are  posed : How 
do  the  Bushmen  make  a living?  How  easy  or 
difficult  is  it  for  them  to  do  this?  What  kinds  of 
evidence  are  necessary  to  measure  and  evaluate 
the  precariousness  or  security  of  a way  of  life  ? 
And  after  the  relevant  data  are  presented,  two 


further  questions  are  asked:  What  makes  this 
security  of  life  possible?  To  what  extent  are  the 
Bushmen  typical  of  hunter-gatherers  in 
general  ? 

Bushman  Subsistence 

The  IKung  Bushmen  of  Botswana  are  an  apt 
case  for  analysis.1  They  inhabit  the  semi-arid 
northwest  region  of  the  Kalahari  Desert.  With 
drought  every  second  or  third  year,  this 
is,  by  any  account,  a marginal  environment 
for  human  habitation.  In  fact,  it  is  precisely 
the  unattractiveness  of  their  homeland  that  has 
kept  the  IKung  isolated  from  extensive  contact 
with  their  agricultural  and  pastoral  neighbors. 

Field  work  was  carried  out  in  the  Dobe  area, 
a line  of  eight  permanent  waterholes  near  the 
South-West  Africa  border  and  125  miles  south 
of  the  Okavango  River.  The  population  of  the 
Dobe  area  consists  of  466  Bushmen,  including 
379  permanent  residents  living  in  independent 
camps  or  associated  with  Bantu  cattle  posts, 

1.  These  data  are  based  on  fifteen  months  of  field 
research  from  October,  1963,  to  January,  1965.  I would 
like  to  thank  the  National  Science  Foundation  (U.S.) 
for  its  generous  financial  support.  This  paper  has  been 
substantially  revised  since  being  presented  at  the 
symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter. 


30 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


3» 


Table  i 

Numbers  and 

Distribution  of  Resident 

Bushmen 

and  Bantu  by 

Waterhole * 

Name  of 

No.  of 

Population 

Other 

Total 

Waterhole 

Camps 

of  Camps 

Bushmen 

Bushmen 

Bantu 

Dobe 

2 

37 

— 

37 

— 

langwa 

I 

16 

23 

39 

84 

Bate 

2 

30 

12 

42 

21 

!ubi 

I 

19 

— 

19 

65 

!gose 

3 

52 

9 

61 

18 

/ ai/ai 

5 

94 

13 

107 

67 

!xabe 

— 

— 

8 

8 

12 

Mahopa 

— 

— 

23 

23 

73 

Total 

14 

248 

88 

336 

340 

* Figures  do  not  include  130  Bushmen  outside  area  on  the  date  of  census. 


as  well  as  87  seasonal  visitors.  The  Bushmen 
share  the  area  with  some  340  Bantu  pastoralists 
largely  of  the  Herero  and  Tswana  tribes.  The 
ethnographic  present  refers  to  the  period  of 
field  work:  October,  1963-January,  1965. 

The  Bushmen  living  in  independent  camps 
lack  firearms,  livestock,  and  agriculture.  Apart 
from  occasional  visits  to  the  Herero  for  milk, 
these  !Kung  are  entirely  dependent  upon 
hunting  and  gathering  for  their  subsistence. 
Politically  they  are  under  the  nominal  author- 
ity of  the  Tswana  headman,  although  they 
pay  no  taxes  and  receive  very  few  government 
services.  European  presence  amounts  to  one 
overnight  government  patrol  every  six  to  eight 
weeks.  Although  Dobe-area  !Kung  have  had 
some  contact  with  outsiders  since  the  1880’s, 
the  majority  of  them  continue  to  hunt  and 
gather  because  there  is  no  viable  alternative 
locally  available  to  them.2 

Each  of  the  fourteen  independent  camps  is 
associated  with  one  of  the  permanent  water- 
holes.  During  the  dry  season  (May-October) 
the  entire  population  is  clustered  around  these 
wells.  Table  1 shows  the  numbers  at  each  well 
at  the  end  of  the  1964  dry  season.  Two  wells 

2.  The  Nyae  Nyae  !Kung  Bushmen  studied  by  Lorna 
Marshall  (1957,  i960,  1965)  have  been  involved  in  a 
settlement  scheme  instituted  by  the  South  African 
government.  Although  closely  related  to  the  Nyae  Nyae 
!Kung,  the  Dobe  !Kung  across  the  border  in  Botswana 
have  not  participated  in  the  scheme. 

3.  Bushman  group  structure  is  discussed  in  more 
detail  in  Lee  (1965,  pp.  38-53;  and  Chapter  17c,  this 
volume). 


had  no  camp  resident  and  one  large  well  sup- 
ported five  camps.  The  number  of  camps  at 
each  well  and  the  size  of  each  camp  changed 
frequently  during  the  course  of  the  year.  The 
“camp”  is  an  open  aggregate  of  cooperating 
persons  which  changes  in  size  and  compositio’n 
from  day  to  day.  Therefore,  I have  avoided  the 
term  “band”  in  describing  the  IKung  Bush- 
man living  groups.3 

Each  waterhole  has  a hinterland  lying  within 
a six-mile  radius  which  is  regularly  exploited 
for  vegetable  and  animal  foods.  These  areas 
are  not  territories  in  the  zoological  sense, 
since  they  are  not  defended  against  outsiders. 
Rather  they  constitute  the  resources  that  lie 
within  a convenient  walking  distance  of  a 
waterhole.  The  camp  is  a self-sufficient  sub- 
sistence unit.  The  members  move  out  each  day 
to  hunt  and  gather,  and  return  in  the  evening 
to  pool  the  collected  foods  in  such  a way  that 
every  person  present  receives  an  equitable 
share.  Trade  in  foodstuffs  between  camps  is 
minimal ; personnel  do  move  freely  from 
camp  to  camp,  however.  The  net  effect  is  of  a 
population  constantly  in  motion.  On  the  aver- 
age, an  individual  spends  a third  of  his  time 
living  only  with  close  relatives,  a third  visiting 
other  camps,  and  a third  entertaining  visitors 
from  other  camps. 

Because  of  the  strong  emphasis  on  sharing, 
and  the  frequency  of  movement,  surplus 
accumulation  of  storable  plant  foods  and  dried 
meat  is  kept  to  a minimum.  There  is  rarely 
more  than  two  or  three  days’  supply  of  food  on 


Table  2 The  Bushman  Annual  Round 


32  Ecology  and  Economics 


Held  once  every  five  years;  none  in  1963-64. 

New  Y ear’s : Bushmen  join  the  celebrations  of  their  missionized  Bantu  neighbors. 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


hand  in  a camp  at  any  time.  The  result  of  this 
lack  of  surplus  is  that  a constant  subsistence 
effort  must  be  maintained  throughout  the 
year.  Unlike  agriculturalists  who  work  hard 
during  the  planting  and  harvesting  seasons 
and  undergo  “seasonal  unemployment”  for 
several  months,  the  Bushmen  hunter-gatherers 
collect  food  every  third  or  fourth  day  through- 
out the  year. 

Vegetable  foods  comprise  from  60-80  per 
cent  of  the  total  diet  by  weight,  and  col- 
lecting involves  two  or  three  days  of  work  per 
woman  per  week.  The  men  also  collect  plants 
and  small  animals  but  their  major  contribution 
to  the  diet  is  the  hunting  of  medium  and  large 
game.  The  men  are  conscientious  but  not  par- 
ticularly successful  hunters;  although  men’s 
and  women’s  work  input  is  roughly  equivalent 
in  terms  of  man-day  of  effort,  the  women  pro- 
vide two  to  three  times  as  much  food  by  weight 
as  the  men. 

Table  2 summarizes  the  seasonal  activity 
cycle  observed  among  the  Dobe-area  !Kung  in 
1964.  For  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  food  is 
locally  abundant  and  easily  collected.  It  is  only 
during  the  end  of  the  dry  season  in  September 
and  October,  when  desirable  foods  have  been 
eaten  out  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
waterholes  that  the  people  have  to  plan  longer 
hikes  of  10-15  miles  and  carry  their  own  water 
to  those  areas  where  the  mongongo  nut  is  still 
available.  The  important  point  is  that  food  is  a 
constant,  but  distance  required  to  reach  food  is 
a variable;  it  is  short  in  the  summer,  fall,  and 
early  winter,  and  reaches  its  maximum  in  the 
spring. 

This  analysis  attempts  to  provide  quanti- 
tative measures  of  subsistence  status  including 
data  on  the  following  topics:  abundance  and 
variety  of  resources,  diet  selectivity,  range  size 
and  population  density,  the  composition  of  the 
work  force,  the  ratio  of  work  to  leisure  time, 
and  the  caloric  and  protein  levels  in  the  diet. 
The  value  of  quantitative  data  is  that  they  can 
be  used  comparatively  and  also  may  be  useful 
in  archeological  reconstruction.  In  addition, 
one  can  avoid  the  pitfalls  of  subjective  and 
qualitative  impressions;  for  example,  state- 
ments about  food  “anxiety”  have  proven  to  be 
difficult  to  generalize  across  cultures  (see 
Holmberg,  1950;  and  Needham’s  critique, 
1954)- 


33 

Abundance  and  Variety  of  Resources 

It  is  impossible  to  define  “abundance”  of  re- 
sources absolutely.  However,  one  index  of 
relative  abundance  is  whether  or  not  a popula- 
tion exhausts  all  the  food  available  from  a given 
area.  By  this  criterion,  the  habitat  of  the  Dobe- 
area  Bushmen  is  abundant  in  naturally  occur- 
ring foods.  By  far  the  most  important  food  is 
the  Mongongo  (mangetti)  nut  ( Ricinodendron 
rautanenii  Schinz).  Although  tens  of  thousands 
of  pounds  of  these  nuts  are  harvested  and  eaten 
each  year,  thousands  more  rot  on  the  ground 
each  year  for  want  of  picking. 

The  mongongo  nut,  because  ofits  abundance 
and  reliability,  alone  accounts  for  50  per  cent 
of  the  vegetable  diet  by  weight.  In  this  respect 
it  resembles  a cultivated  staple  crop  such  as 
maize  or  rice.  Nutritionally  it  is  even  more  re- 
markable, for  it  contains  five  times  the  calories 
and  ten  times  the  proteins  per  cooked  unit 
of  the  cereal  crops.  The  average  daily  per- 
capita  consumption  of  300  nuts  yields  about 
1,260  calories  and  56  grams  of  protein.  This 
modest  portion,  weighing  only  about  7.5 
ounces,  contains  the  caloric  equivalent  of  2.5 
pounds  of  cooked  rice  and  the  protein  equiva- 
lent of  14  ounces  of  lean  beef  (Watt  and 
Merrill,  1963). 

Furthermore  the  mongongo  nut  is  drought 
resistant  and  it  will  still  be  abundant  in  the 
dry  years  when  cultivated  crops  may  fail.  The 
extremely  hard  outer  shell  protects  the  inner 
kernel  from  rot  and  allows  the  nuts  to  be  har- 
vested for  up  to  twelve  months  after  they  have 
fallen  to  the  ground.  A diet  based  on  mongongo 
nuts  is  in  fact  more  reliable  than  one  based  on 
cultivated  foods,  and  it  is  not  surprising,  there- 
fore, that  when  a Bushman  was  asked  why  he 
hadn’t  taken  to  agriculture  he  replied:  “Why 
should  we  plant,  when  there  are  so  many 
mongongo  nuts  in  the  world?” 

Apart  from  the  mongongo,  the  Bushmen 
have  available  84  other  species  of  edible  food 
plants,  including  29  species  of  fruits,  berries, 
and  melons  and  30  species  of  roots  and  bulbs. 
The  existence  of  this  variety  allows  for  a wide 
range  of  alternatives  in  subsistence  strategy. 
During  the  summer  months  the  Bushmen  have 
no  problem  other  than  to  choose  among  the 
tastiest  and  most  easily  collected  foods.  Many 
species,  which  are  quite  edible  but  less  attractive, 


34  Ecology  and  Economics 


* i species  constitutes  50  per  cent  of  the  vegetable  diet  by  weight, 
t 23  species  constitute  90  per  cent  of  the  vegetable  diet  by  weight. 
J 62  species  constitute  the  remaining  10  per  cent  of  the  diet. 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or.  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


are  bypassed,  so  that  gathering  never  ex- 
hausts all  the  available  plant  foods  of  an  area. 
During  the  dry  season  the  diet  becomes  much 
more  eclectic  and  the  many  species  of  roots, 
bulbs,  and  edible  resins  make  an  important 
contribution.  It  is  this  broad  base  that  pro- 
vides an  essential  margin  of  safety  during  the 
end  of  the  dry  season  when  the  mongongo  nut 
forests  are  difficult  to  reach.  In  addition,  it  is 
likely  that  these  rarely  utilized  species  provide 
important  nutritional  and  mineral  trace  ele- 
ments that  may  be  lacking  in  the  more  popular 
foods. 

Diet  Selectivity 

If  the  Bushmen  were  living  close  to  the 
“starvation”  level,  then  one  would  expect 
them  to  exploit  every  available  source  of 
nutrition.  That  their  life  is  well  above  this 
level  is  indicated  by  the  data  in  Table  3.  Here 
all  the  edible  plant  species  are  arranged  in 
classes  according  to  the  frequency  with  which 
they  were  observed  to  be  eaten.  It  should  be 
noted,  that  although  there  are  some  85  species 
available,  about  90  per  cent  of  the  vegetable 
diet  by  weight  is  drawn  from  only  23  species. 
In  other  words,  75  per  cent  of  the  listed  species 
provide  only  10  per  cent  of  the  food  value. 

In  their  meat-eating  habits,  the  Bushmen 
show  a similar  selectivity.  Of  the  223  local 
species  of  animals  known  and  named  by  the 
Bushmen,  54  species  are  classified  as  edible, 
and  of  these  only  1 7 species  were  hunted  on  a 
regular  basis.4  Only  a handful  of  the  dozens  of 
edible  species  of  small  mammals,  birds,  rep- 
tiles, and  iiisects  that  occur  locally  are  regarded 
as  food.  Such  animals  as  rodents,  snakes, 
lizards,  termites,  and  grasshoppers,  which  in 
the  literature  are  included  in  the  Bushman 
dietary  (Schapera,  1930),  are  despised  by  the 
Bushmen  of  the  Dobe  area. 

Range  Size  and  Population  Density 

The  necessity  to  travel  long  distances,  the  high 

4.  Listed  in  order  of  their  importance,  the  principal 
species  in  the  diet  are:  wart  hog,  kudu,  duiker,  steenbok, 
gemsbok,  wildebeeste,  springhare,  porcupine,  ant  bear, 
hare,  guinea  fowl,  francolin  (two  species),  korhaan, 
tortoise,  and  python. 


35 

frequency  of  moves,  and  the  maintenance  of 
populations  at  low  densities  are  also  features 
commonly  associated  with  the  hunting  and 
gathering  way  of  life.  Density  estimates  for 
hunters  in  western  North  America  and 
Australia  have  ranged  from  3 persons /square 
mile  to  as  low  as  1 person/ 100  square  miles 
(Kroeber,  4939;  Radcliffe-Brown,  1930).  In 
1963-65,  the  resident  and  visiting  Bushmen 
were  observed  to  utilize  an  area  of  about  1 ,000 
square  miles  during  the  course  of  the  annual 
round  for  an  effective  population  density  of 
41  persons/ 100  square  miles.  Within  this 
area,  however,  the  amount  of  ground  covered 
by  members  of  an  individual  camp  was 
surprisingly  small.  A day’s  round-trip  of  twelve 
miles  serves  to  define  a “core”  area  six  miles  in 
radius  surrounding  each  water  point.  By  fan- 
ning out  in  all  directions  from  their  well,  the 
members  of  a camp  can  gain  access  to  the  food 
resources  of  well  over  100  square  miles  of  terri- 
tory within  a two-hour  hike.  Except  for  a few 
weeks  each  year,  areas  lying  beyond  this  six- 
mile  radius  are  rarely  utilized,  even  though 
they  are  no  less  rich  in  plants  and  game  than 
are  the  core  areas. 

Although  the  Bushmen  move  their  camps 
frequently  (five  or  six  times  a year)  they  do  not 
move  them  very  far.  A rainy  season  camp  in  the 
nut  forests  is  rarely  more  than  ten  or  twelve 
miles  from  the  home  waterhole,  and  often  new 
campsites  are  occupied  only  a few  hundred 
yards  away  from  the  previous  one.  They  do 
not  undertake  long  marches  of  30  to  100  miles 
to  get  food,  since  this  task  can  be  readily  ful- 
filled within  a day’s  walk  of  home  base.  When 
such  long  marches  do  occur  they  are  invariably 
for  visiting,  trading,  and  marriage  arrange- 
ments, and  should  not  be  confused  with  the 
normal  routine  of  subsistence. 

Demographic  Factors 

Another  indicator  of  the  harshness  of  a way  of 
life  is  the  age  at  which  people  die.  Ever  since 
Hobbes  characterized  life  in  the  state  of  nature 
as  “nasty,  brutish  and  short,”  the  assumption 
has  been  that  hunting  and  gathering  is  so 
rigorous  that  members  of  such  societies  are 
rapidly  worn  out  and  meet  an  early  death. 
Silberbauer,  for  example,  says  of  the  Gwi 


36  Ecology  and  Economics 

Bushmen  of  the  central  Kalahari  that  “life 
expectancy  ...  is  difficult  to  calculate,  but  I 
do  not  believe  that  many  live  beyond  45” 

( 1 965,  p.  17).  And  Coon  has  said  of  the  hunters 
in  general : 

The  practice  of  abandoning  the  hopelessly  ill 
and  aged  has  been  observed  in  many  parts  of  the 
world.  It  is  always  done  by  people  living  in  poor 
environments  where  it  is  necessary  to  move  about 
frequently  to  obtain  food,  where  food  is  scarce, 
and  transportation  difficult.  . . . Among  peoples 
who  are  forced  to  live  in  this  way  the  oldest 
generation,  the  generation  of  individuals  who 
have  passed  their  physical  peak  is  reduced  in 
numbers  and  influence.  There  is  no  body  of 
elders  to  hand  on  tradition  and  control  the  affairs 
of  younger  men  and  women,  and  no  formal  system 
of  age  grading  (1948,  p.  55). 

The  IKung  Bushmen  of  the  Dobe  area  flatly 
contradict  this  view.  In  a total  population  of 
466,  no  fewer  than  46  individuals  ( 1 7 men  and 
29  women)  were  determined  to  be  over  60  years 
of  age,  a proportion  that  compares  favorably 
to  the  percentage  of  elderly  in  indust  ralized 
populations. 

The  aged  hold  a respected  position  in  Bush- 
man society  and  are  the  effective  leaders  of  the 
camps.  Senilicide  is  extremely  rare.  Long  after 
their  productive  years  have  passed,  the  old 
people  are  fed  and  cared  for  by  their  children 
and  grandchildren.  The  blind,  the  senile,  and 
the  crippled  are  respected  for  the  special  ritual 
and  technical  skills  they  possess.  For  instance, 
the  four  elders  at  Igose  waterhole  were  totally 
or  partially  blind,  but  this  handicap  did  not 
prevent  their  active  participation  in  decision- 
making and  ritual  curing. 

Another  significant  feature  of  the  composi- 
tion of  the  work  force  is  the  late  assumption  of 
adult  responsibility  by  the  adolescents.  Young 
people  are  not  expected  to  provide  food  regu- 
larly until  they  are  married.  Girls  typically 
marry  between  the  ages  of  15  and  20,  and  boys 
about  five  years  later,  so  that  it  is  not  unusual 
to  find  healthy,  active  teenagers  visiting  from 
camp  to  camp  while  their  older  relatives  pro- 
vide food  for  them. 

As  a result,  the  people  in  the  age  group  20- 
Go  support  a surprisingly  large  percentage  of 


non-productive  young  and  old  people.  About 
40  per  cent  of  the  population  in  camps  contri- 
bute little  to  the  food  supplies.  This  allocation 
of  work  to  young  and  middle-aged  adults 
allows  for  a relatively  carefree  childhood  and 
adolescence  and  a relatively  unstrenuous  old 
age. 

Leisure  and  Work 

Another  important  index  of  ease  or  difficulty 
of  subsistence  is  the  amount  of  time  devoted 
to  the  food  quest.1'  Hunting  has  usually  been 
regarded  by  social  scientists  as  a way  of  life 
in  which  merely  keeping  alive  is  so  formidable 
a task  that  members  of  such  societies  lack  the 
leisure  time  necessary  to  “build  culture.”6 
The  IKung  Bushmen  would  appear  to  conform 
to  the  rule,  for  as  Lorna  Marshall  says: 

It  is  vividly  apparent  that  among  the  IKung 
Bushmen,  ethos,  or  “the  spirit  which  actuates 
manners  and  customs,”  is  survival.  Their  time 
and  energies  are  almost  wholly  given  to  this  task, 
for  life  in  their  environment  requires  that  they 
spend  their  days  mainly  in  procuring  food  (1965, 
p.  247). 

It  is  certainly  true  that  getting  food  is  the 
most  important  single  activity  in  Bushman  life. 
However  this  statement  would  apply  equally 
well  to  small-scale  agricultural  and  pastoral 
societies  too.  How  much  time  is  actually  devoted 
to  the  food  quest  is  fortunately  an  empirical 
question.  And  an  analysis  of  the  work  effort 
of  the  Dobe  Bushmen  shows  some-  unexpected 
results.  From  July  6 to  August  2,  1964,  I re- 
corded all  the  daily  activities  of  the  Bushmen 
living  at  the  Dobe  waterhole.  Because  of  the 
coming  and  going  of  visitors,  the  camp  popula- 
tion fluctuated  in  size  day  by  day,  from  a low 

5.  This  and  the  following  topic  are  discussed  in  greater 
detail  in  Lee,  “IKung  Bushman  Subsistence:  An  Input- 
Output  Analysis”  ( 1969). 

6.  Lenski,  for  example,  in  a recent  review  of  the  sub- 
ject, states:  “Unlike  the  members  of  hunting  and 
gathering  societies  [the  horticulturalists]  are  not  com- 
pelled to  spend  most  of  their  working  hours  in  the  search 
for  food  and  other  necessities  of  life,  but  are  able  to  use 
more  of  their  time  in  other  ways”  (1966,  p.  121).  Sahlins 
(Chap,  9b,  this  volume)  offers  a counter-argument  to 
this  view. 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or.  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


of  23  to  a high  of  40,  with  a mean  of  31.8 
persons.  Each  day  some  of  the  adult  members 
of  the  camp  went  out  to  hunt  and/or  gather 
while  others  stayed  home  or  went  visiting.  The 
daily  recording  of  all  personnel  on  hand  made 
it  possible  to  calculate  the  number  of  man-days 
of  work  as  a percentage  of  total  number  of 
man-days  of  consumption. 

Although  the  Bushmen  do  not  organize  their 
activities  on  the  basis  of  a seven-day  week,  I 
have  divided  the  data  this  way  to  make  them 
more  intelligible.  The  work-week  was  cal- 
culated to  show  how  many  days  out  of  seven 
each  adult  spent  in  subsistence  activities 
(Table  4,  Column  7).  Week  II  has  been  elimi- 
nated from  the  totals  since  the  investigator 
contributed  food.  In  week  I,  the  people  spent 
an  average  of  2.3  days  in  subsistence  activities, 
in  week  III,  1.9  days,  and  in  week  IV,  3.2 
days.  In  all,  the  adults  of  the  Dobe  camp 
worked  about  two  and  a half  days  a week. 
Since  the  average  working  day  was  about  six 
hours  long,  the  fact  emerges  that  IKung  Bush- 
men of  Dobe,  despite  their  harsh  environment, 
devote  from  twelve  to  nineteen  hours  a week  to 
getting  food.  Even  the  hardest  working  indi- 
vidual in  the  camp,  a man  named  ^oma 
who  went  out  hunting  on  sixteen  of  the  28 
days,  spent  a maximum  of  32  hours  a week  in 
the  food  quest. 

Because  the  Bushmen  do  not  amass  a surplus 
of  foods,  there  are  no  seasons  of  exceptionally 
intensive  activities  such  as  planting  and  har- 
vesting, and  no  seasons  of  unemployment.  The 
level  of  work  observed  is  an  accurate  reflection 
of  the  effort  required  to  meet  the  immediate 
caloric  needs  of  the  group.  This  work  diary 
covers  the  mid-winter  dry  season,  a period 
when  food  is  neither  at  its  most  plentiful  nor 
at  its  scarcest  levels,  and  the  diary  documents 
the  transition  from  better  to  worse  conditions 
(see  Table  2).  During  the  fourth  week  the 
gatherers  were  making  overnight  trips  to  camps 
in  the  mongongo  nut  forests  seven  to  ten  miles 
distant  from  the  waterhole.  These  longer  trips 
account  for  the  rise  in  the  level  of  work,  from 
twelve  or  thirteen  to  nineteen  hours  per  week. 

If  food  getting  occupies  such  a small  propor- 
tion of  a Bushman’s  waking  hours,  then  how 
do  people  allocate  their  time?  A woman 
gathers  on  one  day  enough  food  to  feed  her 


37 

family  for  three  days,  and  spends  the  rest  of 
her  time  resting  in  camp,  doing  embroidery, 
visiting  other  camps,  or  entertaining  visitors 
from  other  camps.  For  each  day  at  home, 
kitchen  routines,  such  as  cooking,  nut  cracking, 
collecting  firewood,  and  fetching  water,  occupy 
one  to  three  hours  of  her  time.  This  rhythm  of 
steady  work  and  steady  leisure  is  maintained 
throughout  the  year. 

The  hunters  tend  to  work  more  frequently 
than  the  women,  but  their  schedule  is  uneven. 
It  is  not  unusual  for  a man  to  hunt  avidly  for  a 
week  and  then  do  no  hunting  at  all  for  two  or 
three  weeks.  Since  hunting  is  an  unpredictable 
business  and  subject  to  magical  control,  hun- 
ters sometimes  experience  a run  of  bad  luck 
and  stop  hunting  for  a month  or  longer.  During 
these  periods,  visiting,  entertaining,  and  es- 
pecially dancing  are  the  primary  activities  of 
men.  (Unlike  the  Hadza,  gambling  is  only  a 
minor  leisure  activity.) 

The  trance-dance  is  the  focus  of  Bushman 
ritual  life;  over  40  per  cent  of  the  men  have 
trained  as  trance-performers  and  regularly 
enter  trance  during  the  course  of  the  all-night 
dances.  At  some  camps,  trance-dances  occur  as 
frequently  as  two  or  three  times  a week  and 
those  who  have  entered  trances  the  night  be- 
fore rarely  go  out  hunting  the  following  day. 
Accounts  of  Bushman  trance  performances 
have  been  published  in  Lorna  Marshall  (1962) 
and  Lee  (1968).  In  a camp  with  five  or  more 
hunters,  there  are  usually  two  or  three  who  are 
actively  hunting  and  several  others  who  are 
inactive.  The  net  effect  is  to  phase  the  hunting 
and  non-hunting  so  that  a fairly  steady  supply 
of  meat  is  brought  into  a camp. 

Caloric  Returns 

Is  the  modest  work  effort  of  the  Bushmen  suffi- 
cient to  provide  the  calories  necessary  to  main- 
tain the  health  of  the  population?  Or  have  the 
IKung,  in  common  with  some  agricultural 
peoples  (see  Richards,  1939),  adjusted  to  a 
permanently  substandard  nutritional  level? 

During  my  field  work  I did  not  encounter 
any  cases  of  kwashiorkor,  the  most  common 
nutritional  disease  in  the  children  of  African 
agricultural  societies.  However,  without  medi- 
cal examinations,  it  is  impossible  to  exclude 


Table  4 Summary  of  Dobe  Work  Diary 


Ecology  and  Economics 


: Index  of  Subsistence  Effort  ==  (e.g.,  in  Week  I,  the  value  of  “S”  = .21,  i.e.,  21  days  of  work/ 1 00 

man-days  of  consumption 

days  of  consumption  or  1 work  day  produces  food  for  5 consumption  days). 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


39 


Table  5 Caloric  and  Protein  Levels  in  the  IKung  Bushman  Dietary,  July- August,  ig6 4 


Percentage 

Percentage 

Per  Capita  Consumption 

Caloric 

Contribution 

Calories 

Contribution  of 

Class 

to  Diet 

Weight 

Protein 

per  person 

Meat  and 

tf  Food 

by  Weight 

in  grams 

in  grams 

per  day 

Vegetables 

Meat 

37 

230 

34-5 

690 

33 

Mongongo  Nuts 
Other  Vegetable 
Foods 

33 

210 

56.7 

1,260  'l 

67 

30 

190 

‘■9 

190  J 

Total 

All  Sources 

IOO 

630 

93- 1 

2,140 

IOO 

the  possibility  that  subclinical  signs  of  mal- 
nutrition existed.7 

Another  measure  of  nutritional  adequacy  is 
the  average  consumption  of  calories  and  pro- 
teins per  person  per  day.  The  estimate  for  the 
Bushmen  is  based  on  observations  of  the 
weights  of  foods  of  known  composition  that 
were  brought  into  Dobe  camp  on  each  day  of 
the  study  period.  The  per-capita  figure  is  ob- 
tained by  dividing  the  total  weight  of  foodstuffs 
by  the  total  number  of  persons  in  the  camp. 
These  results  are  set  out  in  detail  elsewhere 
(Lee,  1969  ) and  can  only  be  summarized 
here.  During  the  study  period  410  pounds  of 
meat  were  brought  in  by  the  hunters  of  the 
Dobe  camp,  for  a daily  share  of  nine  ounces  of 
meat  per  person.  About  700  pounds  of  vege- 
table foods  were  gathered  and  consumed  dur- 
ing the  same  period.  Table  5 sets  out  the 
calories  and  proteins  available  per  capita  in 
the  IKung  Bushman  dietary  from  meat, 
mongongo  nuts,  and  other  vegetable  sources. 

This  output  of  2,140  calories  and  93.1  grams 
of  protein  per  person  per  day  may  be  com- 
pared with  the  Recommended  Daily  Allow- 
ances (RDA)  for  persons  of  the  small  size  and 
stature  but  vigorous  activity  regime  of  the 
IKung  Bushmen.  The  RDA  for  Bushmen  can 
be  estimated  at  1 ,975  calories  and  60  grams  of 

7.  During  future  field  work  with  the  IKung  Bushmen, 
a professional  pediatrician  and  nutritionist  are  planning 
to  examine  children  and  adults  as  part  of  a general  study 
of  hunter-gatherer  health  and  nutrition  sponsored  by  the 
U.S.  National  Institutes  of  Health  and  the  Wenner-Gren 
Foundation  for  Anthropological  Research. 


protein  per  person  per  day.  (Taylor  and  Pye, 
1965,  pp.  45-48,  463).  Thus  it  is  apparent  that 
food  output  exceeds  energy  requirements  by 
165  calories  and  33  grams  of  protein.  One  can 
tentatively  conclude  that  even  a modest  sub- 
sistence effort  of  two  or  three  days  work  per 
week  is  enough  to  provide  an  adequate  diet  for 
the  IKung  Bushmen. 

The  Security  of  Bushman  Life 

1 have  attempted  to  evaluate  the  subsistence 
base  of  one  contemporary  hunter-gatherer 
society  living  in  a marginal  environment.  The 
IKung  Bushmen  have  available  to  them  some 
relatively  abundant  high-quality  foods,  and 
they  do  not  have  to  walk  very  far  or  work  very 
hard  to  get  them.  Furthermore  this  modest 
work  effort  provides  sufficient  calories  to  sup- 
port not  only  the  active  adults,  but  also  a large 
number  of  middle-aged  and  elderly  people. 
The  Bushmen  do  not  have  to  press  their 
youngsters  into  the  service  of  the  food  quest, 
nor  do  they  have  to  dispose  of  the  oldsters  after 
they  have  ceased  to  be  productive. 

The  evidence  presented  assumes  an  added 
significance  because  this  security  of  life  was 
observed  during  the  third  year  of  one  of  the 
most  severe  droughts  in  South  Africa’s  history. 
Most  of  the  576,000  people  of  Botswana  are 
pastoralists  and  agriculturalists.  After  the  crops 
had  failed  three  years  in  succession  and  over 

2 50,000  head  of  cattle  had  died  on  the  range 
for  lack  of  water,  the  World  Food  Program  of 


40  Ecology  and  Economics 

the  United  Nations  instituted  a famine  relief 
program  which  has  grown  to  include  180,000 
people,  over  30  per  cent  of  the  population 
(Government  of  Botswana,  1966).  This  pro- 
gram barely  touched  the  Dobe  area  in  the  iso- 
lated northwest  corner  of  the  country  and  the 
Herero  and  Tswana  women  there  were  able  to 
feed  their  families  only  by  joining  the  Bushman 
women  to  forage  for  wild  foods.  Thus  the 
natural  plant  resources  of  the  Dobe  area  were 
carrying  a higher  proportion  of  population 
than  would  be  the  case  in  years  when  the  Bantu 
harvested  crops.  Yet  this  added  pressure  on  the 
land  did  not  seem  to  adversely  affect  the 
Bushmen. 

In  one  sense  it  was  unfortunate  that  the 
period  of  my  field  work  happened  to  coincide 
with  the  drought,  since  I was  unable  to  witness 
a “typical”  annual  subsistence  cycle.  However, 
in  another  sense,  the  coincidence  was  a lucky 
one,  for  the  drought  put  the  Bushmen  and  their 
subsistence  system  to  the  acid  test  and,  in  terms 
of  adaptation  to  scarce  resources,  they  passed 
with  flying  colors.  One  can  postulate  that  their 
subsistence  base  would  be  even  more  sub- 
stantial during  years  of  higher  rainfall. 

What  are  the  crucial  factors  that  make  this 
way  of  life  possible  ? I suggest  that  the  primary 
factor  is  the  Bushmen’s  strong  emphasis  on 
vegetable  food  sources.  Although  hunting 
involves  a great  deal  of  effort  and  prestige, 
plant  foods  provide  from  60-80  per  cent  of  the 
annual  diet  by  weight.  Meat  has  come  to  be 
regarded  as  a special  treat;  when  available,  it 
is  welcomed  as  a break  from  the  routine  of 
vegetable  foods,  but  it  is  never  depended  upon 
as  a staple.  No  one  ever  goes  hungry  when 
hunting  fails. 

The  reason  for  this  emphasis  is  not  hard  to 
find.  Vegetable  foods  are  abundant,  sedentary, 
and  predictable.  They  grow  in  the  same  place 
year  after  year,  and  the  gatherer  is  guaranteed 
a day’s  return  of  food  for  a day’s  expenditure 
of  energy.  Game  animals,  by  contrast,  are 
scarce,  mobile,  unpredictable,  and  difficult  to 
catch.  A hunter  has  no  guarantee  of  success  and 
may  in  fact  go  for  days  or  weeks  without  killing 
a large  mammal.  During  the  study  period, 
there  were  eleven  men  in  the  Dobe  camp,  of 
whom  four  did  no  hunting  at  all.  The  seven 
active  men  spent  a total  of  78  man-days  hunt- 
ing, and  this  work  input  yielded  eighteen 


animals  killed,  or  one  kill  for  every  four  man- 
days  of  hunting.  The  probability  of  any  one 
hunter  making  a kill  on  a given  day  was  0.23. 
By  contrast,  the  probability  ofa  woman  finding 
plant  food  on  a given  day  was  1.00.  In  other 
words,  hunting  and  gathering  are  not  equally 
felicitous  subsistence  alternatives. 

Consider  the  productivity  per  man-hour  of 
the  two  kinds  of  subsistence  activities.  One 
man-hour  of  hunting  produces  about  800 
edible  calories,  and  of  gathering,  2, ooocalories. 
Gathering  is  thus  seen  to  be  2.4  times  more 
productive  than  hunting.  In  short,  hunting  is  a 
high-risk,  low-return  subsistence  activity,  while 
gathering  is  a low-risk,  high-return  subsistence 
activity. 

It  is  not  at  all  contradictory  that  the  hunting 
complex  holds  a central  place  in  the  Bushman 
ethos  and  that  meat  is  valued  more  highly  than 
vegetable  foods  (Marshall,  i960).  Analogously, 
steak  is  valued  more  highly  than  potatoes  in 
the  food  preferences  of  our  own  society.  In  both 
situations  the  meat  is  more  “costly”  than  the 
vegetable  food.  In  the  Bushman  case,  the  cost 
of  food  can  be  measured  in  terms  of  time  and 
energy  expended.  By  this  standard,  1,000 
calories  of  meat  “costs”  1.2  man-hours,  while 
the  “cost”  of  1 ,000  calories  of  vegetable  foods 
is  only  0.5  man-hours.  Further,  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  the  less  predictable,  more  ex- 
pensive food  source  would  have  a greater 
accretion  of  myth  and  ritual  built  up  around  it 
than  would  the  routine  staples  of  life,  which 
rarely  if  ever  fail. 

Eskimo-Bushman  Comparisons 

Were  the  Bushmen  to  be  deprived  of  their  vege- 
table food  sources,  their  life  would  become 
much  more  arduous  and  precarious.  This  lack 
of  plant  foods,  in  fact,  is  precisely  the  situation 
among  the  Netsilik  Eskimo,  reported  by  Balikci 
(Chapter  8,  this  volume).  The  Netsilik  and 
other  Central  Arctic  peoples  are  perhaps 
unique  in  the  almost  total  absence  of  vegetable 
foods  in  their  diet.  This  factor,  in  combination 
with  the  great  cyclical  variation  in  the  num- 
bers and  distribution  of  Arctic  fauna,  makes 
Eskimo  life  the  most  precarious  human  adap- 
tation on  earth.  In  effect,  the  kinds  of  animals 
that  are  “ luxury  goods ” to  many  hunters  and 
gatherers  are  to  the  Eskimos  the  absolute  necessities 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


of  life.  However,  even  this  view  should  not  be 
exaggerated,  since  most  of  the  Eskimos  in  his- 
toric times  have  lived  south  of  the  Arctic  Circle 
(Laughlin,  Chapter  2 5a  this  volume)  and  many 
of  the  Eskimos  at  all  latitudes  have  depended 
primarily  on  fishing,  which  is  a much  more 
reliable  source  of  food  than  is  the  hunting  of 
land  and  sea  mammals. 


What  Hunters  Do  for  a 
Living:  A Comparative  Study 

I have  discussed  how  the  IKung  Bushmen  are 
able  to  manage  on  the  scarce  resources  pf  their 
inhospitable  environment.  The  essence  of  their 
successful  strategy  seems  to  be  that  while  they 
depend  primarily  on  the  more  stable  and 
abundant  food  sources  (vegetables  in  their 
case),  they  are  nevertheless  willing  to  devote 
considerable  energy  to  the  less  reliable  and 
more  highly  valued  food  sources  such  as 
medium  and  large  mammals.  The  steady  but 
modest  input  of  work  by  the  women  provides 
the  former,  and  the  more  intensive  labors  of 
the  men  provide  the  latter.  It  would  be  theo- 
retically possible  for  the  Bushmen  to  survive 
entirely  on  vegetable  foods,  but  life  would  be 
boring  indeed  without  the  excitement  of  meat 
feasts.  The  totality  of  their  subsistence  ac- 
tivities thus  represents  an  outcome  of  two 
individual  goals;  the  first  is  the  desire  to  live 
well  with  adequate  leisure  time,  and  the  second 
is  the  desire  to  enjoy  the  rewards,  both  social 
and  nutritional,  afforded  by  the  killing  of 
game.  In  short,  the  Bushmen  of  the  Dobe  area  eat 
as  much  vegetable  food  as  they  need,  and  as  much 
meat  as  they  can. 

It  seems  reasonable  that  a similar  kind  of 
subsistence  strategy  would  be  characteristic  of 
hunters  and  gatherers  in  general.  Wherever 
two  or  more  kinds  of  natural  foods  are  avail- 
able, one  would  predict  that  the  population 
exploiting  them  would  emphasize  the  more  re- 
liable source.  We  would  also  expect,  however, 
that  the  people  would  not  neglect  the  alterna- 
tive means  of  subsistence.  The  general  view 
offered  here  is  that  gathering  activities,  for 
plants  and  shellfish,  should  be  the  most  produc- 
tive of  food  for  hunting  and  gathering  man, 
followed  by  fishing,  where  this  source  is  avail- 
able. The  hunting  of  mammals  is  the  least  re- 


4i 

liable  source  of  food  and  should  be  generally 
less  important  than  either  gathering  or  fishing. 

In  order  to  test  this  hypothesis,  a sample  of 
58  societies  was  drawn  from  the  Ethnographic 
Atlas  (Murdock,  1967).  The  basis  for  inclusion 
in  the  sample  was  a 100  per  cent  dependence 
on  hunting,  gathering  and  fishing  for  sub- 
sistence as  rated  in  Column  7-1 1 of  the  Atlas 
(Murdock,  1967,  pp.  154-55).  These  58  socie- 
ties are  plotted  in  Figures  1 and  2 and  are 
listed  in  Tables  7 and  8 of  the  Appendix  to  this 
Article. 

The  Ethnographic  Atlas  coding  discusses 
“Subsistence  Economy”  as  follows: 

A set  of  five  digits  indicates  the  estimated 
relative  dependence  of  the  society  on  each  of  the 
five  major  types  of  subsistence  activity.  The  first 
digit  refers  to  the  gathering  of  wild  plants  and 
small  land  fauna;  the  second,  to  hunting,  in- 
cluding trapping  and  fowling;  the  third,  to 
fishing,  including  shell  fishing  and  the  pursuit  of 
large  aquatic  animals;  the  fourth,  to  animal 
husbandry;  the  fifth,  to  agriculture  (Murdock, 
1967,  PP-  154-55)- 

Two  changes  have  been  made  in  the  defi- 
nitions of  subsistence.  First,  the  participants  at 
the  symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter  agreed  that 
the  “pursuit  of  large  aquatic  animals”  is  more 
properly  classified  under  hunting  than  under 
fishing.  Similarly,  it  was  recommended  that 
shellfishing  should  be  classified  under  gather- 
ing, not  fishing.  These  suggestions  have  been 
followed  and  the  definitions  now  read : Gather- 
ing— collecting  of  wild  plants,  small  land 

8.  Two  societies,  the  Gwi  Bushmen  and  the  Walbiri 
of  Australia,  were  not  coded  by  the  Ethnographic  Atlas. 
Their  subsistence  base  was  scored  after  consulting  the 
original  ethnographies  (for  the  Gwi,  Silberbauer,  1965; 
for  the  Walbiri,  Meggitt,  1962,  1964). 

9.  In  order  to  make  more  valid  comparisons,  I have 
excluded  from  the  sample  mounted  hunters  with  guns 
such  as  the  Plains  Indians,  and  casual  agriculturalists 
such  as  the  Ge  and  Siriono.  Twenty-four  societies  are 
drawn  from  Africa,  Asia,  Australia  and  South  America. 
This  number  includes  practically  all  of  the  cases  that  fit 
the  definition.  North  America  alone,  with  137  hunting 
societies,  contains  over  80  per  cent  of  the  165  hunting 
societies  listed  in  the  Ethnographic  Atlas.  The  sampling 
procedure  used  here  was  to  choose  randomly  one  case 
from  each  of  the  34  “clusters”  of  North  American 
hunter-gatherers. 


43  Ecology  and  Economics 

fauna  and  shellfish;  Hunting — pursuit  of  land 
and  sea  mammals;  Fishing — obtaining  of  fish 
by  any  technique.  In  25  cases,  the  subsistence 
scores  have  been  changed  in  light  of  these 
definitions  and  after  consulting  ethnographic 
sources.10 

In  Tables  9 and  10  of  the  Appendix  to  this 
article,  the  percentage  dependence  on  gather- 
ing, hunting,  and  fishing,  and  the  most  impor- 
tant single  source  of  food  for  each  society  are 
presented.  Such  scores  can  be  at  best  only 
rough  approximations;  however,  the  results 
are  so  striking  that  the  use  of  these  scores  seems 
justified.  In  the  Old  World  and  South  Ameri- 
can sample  of  24  societies,  sixteen  depend  on 
gathering,  five  on  fishing,  while  only  three  de- 
pend primarily  on  mammal  hunting:  the 
Yukaghir  of  northeast  Asia,  and  the  Ona  and 
Shiriana  of  South  America.  In  the  North 
American  sample,  thirteen  societies  have  pri- 
mary dependence  on  gathering,  thirteen  on 
fishing,  and  eight  on  hunting.  Thus  for  the 
world  as  a whole,  half  of  the  societies  (29  cases) 
emphasize  gathering,  one-third  (18  cases) 
fishing,  and  the  remaining  one-sixth  ( 1 1 cases) 
hunting. 

On  this  evidence,  the  “hunting”  way  of  life 
appears  to  be  in  the  minority.  The  resuit  serves 
to  underline  the  point  made  earlier  that  mam- 
mal hunting  is  the  least  reliable  of  the  sub- 
sistence sources,  and  one  would  expect  few 
societies  to  place  primary  dependence  on  it.  As 
will  be  shown,  most  of  the  societies  that  rely 
primarily  on  mammals  do  so  because  their 
particular  habitats  offer  no  viable  alternative 
subsistence  strategy. 

The  Relation  of  Latitude  to  Subsistence 

The  peoples  we  have  classified  as  “hunters” 
apparently  depend  for  most  of  their  subsist- 
ence on  sources  other  than  meat,  namely,  wild 
plants,  shellfish  and  fish.  In  fact  the  present 
sample  over-emphasizes  the  incidence  of  hunt- 
ing and  fishing  since  some  three-fifths  of  the 
cases  (34/58)  are  drawn  from  North  America 
(north  of  the  Rio  Grande)  a region  which  lies 
entirely  within  the  temperate  and  arctic 
zones.  Since  the  abundance  and  species  variety 
of  edible  plants  decreases  as  one  moves  out  of 
the  tropical  and  temperate  zones,  and  ap- 
proaches zero  in  the  arctic,  it  is  essential  that 


the  incidence  of  hunting,  gathering,  and  fishing 
be  related  to  latitude. 

Table  6 shows  the  relative  importance  of 
gathering,  hunting,  and  fishing  within  each  of 
seven  latitude  divisions.  Hunting  appears  as 
the  dominant  mode  of  subsistence  only  in  the 
highest  latitudes  (60  or  more  degrees  from  the 
equator).  In  the  arctic,  hunting  is  primary  in 
six  of  the  eight  societies.  In  the  cool  to  cold 
temperate  latitudes,  40  to  59  degrees  from  the 
equator,  fishing  is  the  dominant  mode,  appear- 
ing as  primary  in  14  out  of  22  cases.  In  the 
warm-temperate,  subtropical,  and  tropical 
latitudes,  zero  to  39  degrees  from  the  equator, 
gathering  is  by  far  the  dominant  mode  of  subsis- 
tence, appearing  as  primary  in  25  of  the  28  cases. 

For  modern  hunters,  at  any  rate,  it  seems 
legitimate  to  predict  a hunting  emphasis  only 
in  the  arctic,  a fishing  emphasis  in  the  mid- 
high  latitudes,  and  a gathering  emphasis  in 
the  rest  of  the  world." 

The  Importance  of  Hunting 

Although  hunting  is  rarely  the  primary  source 
of  food,  it  does  make  a remarkably  stable  con- 
tribution to  the  diet.  Fishing  appears  to  be  dis- 
pensable in  the  tropics,  and  a number  of 
northern  peoples  manage  to  do  without 
gathered  foods,  but,  with  a single  exception,  all 
societies  at  all  latitudes  derive  at  least  20  per 
cent  of  their  diet  from  the  hunting  of  mammals. 
Latitude  appears  to  make  little  difference  in 
the  amount  of  hunting  that  people  do.  Except 
for  the  highest  latitudes,  where  hunting  contri- 
butes over  half  of  the  diet  in  many  cases, 
hunted  foods  almost  everywhere  else  constitute 
20  to  45  per  cent  of  the  diet.  In  fact,  the  mean, 
the  median,  and  the  mode  for  hunting  all  con- 
verge on  a figure  of  35  per  cent  for  hunter- 
gatherers  at  all  latitudes.  This  percentage  of 

10.  For  their  useful  suggestions,  my  thanks  go  to 
Donald  Lathrap,  Robin  Ridington,  George  Silberbauer, 
Hitoshi  Watanabe,  and  James  Woodburn.  Special  thanks 
are  due  to  Wayne  Suttles  for  his  advice  on  Pacific  coast 
subsistence. 

1 1 . When  severity  of  winter  is  plotted  against  subsis- 
tence choices,  a similar  picture  emerges.  Hunting  is 
primary  in  three  of  the  five  societies  in  very  cold  climates 
(annual  temperature  less  than  320  F.) ; fishing  is  primary 
in  10  of  the  17  societies  in  cold  climates  (32°-50°  F.); 
and  gathering  is  primary  in  27  of  the  36  societies  in  mild 
to  hot  climates  (over  50°  F.). 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


43 


Table  6 

Primary  Subsistence  Source  by  Latitude 

Degrees  from 
the  Equator 

Gathering 

Primary  Subsistence  Source 
Hunting  Fishing 

Total 

Moie  than  6o° 

— 

6 

2 

8 

5°°-59° 

— 

I 

9 

IO 

4°°  ~49° 

4 

3 

5 

12 

3°°-39° 

9 

— 

— 

9 

20°— 29° 

7 

— 

I 

8 

io°-i9° 

5 

— 

I 

6 

o°-9° 

4 

I 

— 

5 

World 

29 

18 

58 

meat  corresponds  closely  to  the  37  per  cent 
noted  in  the  diet  of  the  IKung  Bushmen  of  the 
Dobe  area.  It  is  evident  that  the  IKung,  far 
from  being  an  aberrant  case,  are  entirely  typi- 
cal of  the  hunters  in  general  in  the  amount  of 
meat  they  consume. 

Conclusions 

Three  points  ought  to  be  stressed.  First,  life  in 
the  state  of  nature  is  not  necessarily  nasty, 
brutish,  and  short.  The  Dobe-area  Bushmen 
live  well  today  on  wild  plants  and  meat,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  they  are  confined  to  the 
least  productive  portion  of  the  range  in  which 
Bushman  peoples  were  formerly  found.  It  is 
likely  that  an  even  more  substantial  subsistence 
base  would  have  been  characteristic  of  these 
hunters  and  gatherers  in  the  past,  when  they 
had  the  pick  of  African  habitats  to  choose 
from. 

Second,  the  basis  of  Bushman  diet  is  derived 
from  sources  other  than  meat.  This  emphasis 
makes  good  ecological  sense  to  the  IKung 
Bushmen  and  appears  to  be  a common  feature 
among  hunters  and  gatherers  in  general.  Since 
a 30  to  40  per  cent  input  of  meat  is  such  a con- 


sistent target  for  modern  hunters  in  a variety 
of  habitats,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  postulate  a 
similar  percentage  for  prehistoric  hunters  ? 
Certainly  the  absence  of  plant  remains  on 
archeological  sites  is  by  itself  not  sufficient  evi- 
dence for  the  absence  of  gathering.  Recently- 
abandoned  Bushman  campsites  show  a similar 
absence  of  vegetable  remains,  although  this 
paper  has  clearly  shown  that  plant  foods 
comprise  over  60  per  cent  of  the  actual  diet. 

Finally,  one  gets  the  impression  that  hunting 
societies  have  been  chosen  by  ethnologists  to 
illustrate  a dominant  theme,  such  as  the  ex- 
treme importance  of  environment  in  the  mold- 
ing of  certain  cultures.  Such  a theme  can  be 
best  exemplified  by  cases  in  which  the  tech- 
nology is  simple  and/or  the  environment  is 
harsh.  This  emphasis  on  the  dramatic  may 
have  been  pedagogically  useful,  but  unfor- 
tunately it  has  led  to  the  assumption  that  a 
precarious  hunting  subsistence  base  was  charac- 
teristic of  all  cultures  in  the  Pleistocene.  This 
view  of  both  modern  and  ancient  hunters 
ought  to  be  reconsidered.  Specifically  1 am 
suggesting  a shift  in  focus  away  from  the  dram- 
atic and  unusual  cases,  and  toward  a considera- 
tion of  hunting  and  gathering  as  a persistent 
and  well-adapted  way  of  life. 


44  Ecology  and  Economics 


Appendix 


Table  7 The  Sample  of  Hunter-Gatherers  Table  8 The  North  Anierican  Sample 

(1 excluding  North  America ) 


People  ( Atlas  No.) 

Latitude  and 
Longitude 
(Degrees) 

Africa  n = 5 

1.  !Kung  Bushmen  (Aai) 

20S,  2 1 E 

2.  Dorobo  (Aa2)  ... 

2S,  36E 

3.  Mbuti  Pygmies  (Aa$)  ... 

2N,  28E 

4.  Hadza  (Aa9)  ... 

...  4S.35E 

5.  Gwi  Bushmen  (1) 

22S,  23E 

Asia  n = 5 

6.  Gilyak  (Eci) 

...  53N,  142E 

7.  Yukaghir  (Ec6) 

...  70N,  145E 

8.  Ainu  (EC7) 

...  44N,  144E 

9.  Andamanese  (Ehi) 

12N,  93E 

10.  Semang  (Ej3)  ... 

6N,  101E 

Australia  n = 6 

1 1.  Aranda  (Idi) 

...  24s,  134E 

12.  Murngin  (Id2)... 

12S,  136E 

13.  Tiwi  (M3)  

12S,  13 1 E 

14.  Dieri  (M4) 

28S,  138E 

15.  Wikmunkan  (Id6) 

14S,  142E 

16.  Walbiri  (2) 

...  22S,  133E 

South  America  n = 8 

17.  Paraujano  (Sbs) 

...  1 1 N,  72W 

18.  Shiriana  (Sd6)  ... 

...  4N,  63W 

19.  Yahgan  (Sgi)  

...  55S,  69W 

20.  Ona  (Sg3)  

...  54S,  69W 

21.  Alacaluf  (Sg5)  ... 

...  52s,  74W 

22.  Chamacoco  (Sh6) 

...  20S,  59W 

23.  Aweikoma  (Sj3) 

...  28S,  50W 

24.  Botocudo  (Sj5) 

...  18S,  42W 

Latitude  and 

People  (Atlas  No.) 

Longitude 

(Degrees) 

1.  Copper  Eskimo  (Na3)... 

69N, 

1 10W 

2.  Kaska  (Na4) 

59N, 

128W 

3.  Ingalik  (Na8)  ... 

62N, 

160W 

4.  Chugach  (Naio) 

60N, 

166W 

5.  Nunamiut  (Nai2) 

68N, 

152W 

6.  Kutchin  (Na2o) 

66N, 

135W 

7.  Chipewyan  (Na30) 

60N, 

105W 

8.  Montagnais  (Na32) 

48N,  72W 

9.  Northern  Saulteaux  (Na33) 

52N,  98W 

10.  Eyak  (Nbs)  

60N, 

145W 

11.  Tsimshian  (Nb7) 

55N, 

130W 

12.  Quileute  (Nbi8) 

48N, 

125W 

13.  Chinook  (Nbig) 

46N, 

124W 

14.  Tlingit  (Nb22)... 

58N, 

134W 

15.  Bellabella  (Nb23) 

52N, 

128W 

16.  Cowichan  (Nb26) 

49N, 

123W 

17.  Tututni  (Nb3i) 

42N, 

124W 

18.  Chimariko  (Nb33) 

41N, 

123W 

19.  Tubatulabal  (Nc2) 

36N, 

118W 

20.  Diegueno  (Nc6) 

32N, 

116W 

21.  Modoc  (Ncg)  ... 

43N, 

122W 

22.  Achomawi  (Ncio) 

41N, 

121 W 

23.  Wintu  (NC14)  ... 

4‘N, 

122W 

24.  Coast  Yuki  (NC15) 

39^, 

124W 

25.  Lake  Yokuts  (NC24)  ... 

36N, 

120W 

26.  Cahuilla  (NC31) 

33N, 

116W 

27.  Washo  (Nd6)  ... 

39N, 

120W 

28.  Chilcotin  (Nd8) 

52N, 

122W 

29.  Flathead  (Ndi2) 

46N, 

1 13W 

30.  Umatilla  (Ndig) 

46N, 

1 19W 

31.  Panamint  (Nd32) 

36N, 

1 17W 

32.  Kaibab  (Nd53) 

36N, 

1 13W 

33.  Yavapai  (Nd66) 

35^, 

1 12W 

34.  Seri  (Ni4)  

29N, 

1 12W 

Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


45 


Figure  i.  Old  World  and  South  American  Hunter-Gatherers 


46  Ecology  and  Economics 


Table  g Subsistence  Base  of  Hunter-Gatherers 
( Old  World  and  South  America) 


Percentage  Dependence 

on: 

Primary 

Subsistence 

People 

Gathering 

Hunting 

Fishing 

Source 

1.  IKung  Bushman* 

70 

30 

O 

G 

2.  Dorobo* 

60 

40 

O 

G 

3.  Mbuti 

60 

30 

IO 

G 

4.  Hadza* 

80 

20 

O 

G 

5.  Gwi  Bushmen 

70 

30 

O 

G 

6.  Gilyak* 

30 

30 

40 

F 

7.  Yukaghir* 

IO 

60 

30 

H 

8.  Ainu* 

30 

30 

40 

F 

9.  Andamanese* 

50 

20 

30 

G 

10.  Semang 

40 

30 

3° 

G 

1 1.  Aranda* 

70 

30 

O 

G 

12.  Murngin* 

60 

30 

IO 

G 

13.  Tiwi* 

60 

30 

IO 

G 

14.  Dieri 

70 

30 

0 

G 

15.  Wikmunkan* 

60 

30 

IO 

G 

16.  Walbiri 

70 

30 

0 

G 

17.  Paraujano* 

40 

10 

50 

F 

18.  Shiriana 

30 

40 

30 

H 

19.  Yahgan* 

30 

20 

50 

F 

20.  Ona 

20 

60 

20 

H 

21.  Alacaluf* 

30 

20 

50 

F 

22.  Chamacoco 

60 

40 

O 

G 

23.  Aweikoma* 

60 

40 

O 

G 

24.  Botocudo 

50 

40 

IO 

G 

Total  16  3 5 


* In  some  of  the  cases  marked,  the  subsistence  percentages  have  been  changed 
from  those  published  in  the  Ethnographic  Atlas.  The  categories  have  been  redefined 
so  that  shell  fishing  is  included  under  “Gathering,”  and  pursuit  of  sea-mammals 
under  “Hunting.”  In  the  Atlas,  both  are  included  under  “Fishing.” 


Lee  What  Hunters  Do  for  a Living,  or,  How  to  Make  Out  on  Scarce  Resources 


Figure  a.  North  American  Hunter-Gatherers. 


48  Ecology  and  Economics 


Table  10  Subsistence  Base  of  Hunter -Gatherers 
(North  America) 


Percentage  Dependence 

on: 

Primary 

Subsistence 

People 

Gathering 

Hunting 

Fishing 

Source 

1 . Copper  Eskimo* 

0 

55 

45 

H 

2.  Kaska 

10 

40 

50 

F 

3.  Ingalik 

10 

40 

50 

F 

4.  Chugach* 

10 

60 

3° 

H 

5.  Nunamiut 

10 

7° 

20 

H 

6.  Kutchin 

10 

40 

5° 

F 

7.  Chip'ewyan 

0 

60 

40 

H 

8.  Montagnais 

20 

60 

20 

H 

9.  Saulteaux 

20 

35 

45 

F 

10.  Eyak* 

20 

45 

35 

H 

1 1.  Tsimshian* 

20 

3° 

50 

F 

12.  Quileute* 

30 

30 

40 

F 

13.  Chinook* 

30 

20 

50 

F 

14.  Tlingit* 

10 

40 

50 

F 

15.  Bellabella 

20 

30 

50 

F 

16.  Cowichan* 

40 

30 

3° 

G 

1 7.  Tututni* 

45 

20 

35 

G 

18.  Chimariko 

40 

30 

3° 

G 

19.  Tubatulabal 

50 

30 

20 

G 

20.  Diegueno 

50 

40 

10 

G 

2 1 . Modoc 

50 

30 

20 

G 

22.  Achomawi 

30 

40 

3° 

H 

23.  Wintu 

30 

30 

40 

F 

24.  Coast  Yuki* 

60 

20 

20 

G 

25.  Lake  Yokuts 

50 

20 

30 

G 

26,  Cahuilla 

60 

40 

0 

G 

27.  Washo 

40 

30 

30 

G 

28.  Chilcotin 

20 

30 

50 

F 

29.  Flathead 

30 

40 

30 

H 

30.  Umatilla 

30 

30 

40 

F 

31.  Panamint 

60 

40 

0 

G 

32.  Kaibab 

70 

30 

0 

G 

33.  Yavapai 

60 

40 

0 

G 

34.  Seri* 

30 

20 

50 

F 

Total  (North  America)  ... 

■3 

8 

'3 

Total  (World) 

29 

1 1 

18 

•In  some  of  the  cases  marked,  the  subsistence  percentages  have  been  changed 
from  those  published  in  the  Ethnographic  Atlas.  The  categories  have  been  redefined 
so  that  shell  fishing  is  included  under  “Gathering,”  and  pursuit  of  sea-mammals 
under  “Hunting.”  In  the  Atlas,  both  are  included  under  “Fishing.” 


5 


An  Introduction  to  Hadza  Ecology 


JAMES  WOODBURN 


The  Hadza  (also  known  as  Hadzapi,  Tindiga, 
Kindiga,  and  Kangeju)  are  a small  group  of 
nomadic  hunters  and  gatherers  living  in  the 
vicinity  of  Lake  Eyasi,  a salt,  rift-valley  lake 
not  far  south  of  the  equator  in  Tanzania.1 

Their  language  contains  click  consonants 
and  several  authorities  have  claimed  that  it 
may  be  related  to  Bushman  languages  in 
southern  Africa  (for  example,  Bleek,  1931a, 
i93lb>  I956;  Greenberg,  1950;  Westphal, 
1956).  My  own  work  on  the  language2 3 * *  suggests 
that  the  material  put  forward  as  evidence  for 
such  a link  is  unsatisfactory  and  some  research 
now  in  progress  indicates  that  Hadza  may  pos- 
sibly have  distant  affinities  with  languages  of 
the  Erythraic  (Hamito-Semitic)  group  (A.  N. 
Tucker,  personal  communication).  Work  car- 
ried out  in  1966  and  1967  with  N.  A.  Barnicot 

1.  This  account  consists  of  a simplified  version  of  part 
of  my  unpublished  Ph.D.  thesis  at  the  University  of 
Cambridge  (1964)  which  is  currently  being  revised  for 
publication.  Adequate  factual  data  in  support  of  the 
argument  cannot  be  presented  here  but  will  appear  in 
due  course  in  the  monograph. 

2.  I am  preparing  material  on  the  language  for 
publication. 

3.  I would  like  to  thank  the  following  bodies  which 
provided  funds  for  field  research:  The  Royal  Society; 
the  World  Health  Organization;  the  Wenner-Gren 

Foundation  for  Anthropological  Research;  the  East 

African  Institute  of  Social  Research;  the  Goldsmiths’ 

Company;  the  Smuts  Memorial  Fund;  the  Sir  Bartle 
Frere  Fund;  the  Mary  Euphrasia  Mosley  Fund. 


and  F.  J.  Bennett  on  Hadza  anthropometry 
and  blood-grouping  has  not  yet  shown  any 
evidence  for  a physical  link  with  Bushmen,  but 
only  preliminary  results  are  so  far  available. 
There  is  no  satisfactory  evidence  for  a cultural 
tie  with  Bushmen. 

If  we  treat  as  Hadza  all  those  who  speak  the 
Hadza  language  as  their  first  language,  there 
are  three  separate  groupings  of  Hadza.  In  the 
tsetse  bush  to  the  east  of  Lake  Eyasi,  an  area  of, 
until  recently,  well  over  a thousand  square 
miles,  are  some  four  hundred  nomadic  hunters 
and  gatherers  whom  I shall  refer  to  as  the 
Eastern  Hadza.  South  of  these  are  more  than  a 
hundred  settled  Hadza  who  live,  and  have 
lived  at  least  since  the  first  Europeans  visited 
the  area  in  the  1890’s,  by  agriculture  and  by 
hunting,  and  who  have  intermarried  in- 
tensively with  the  neighboring  Bantu-speaking 
Isanzu  tribe.  The  third  group  of  Hadza,  the 
great  majority  of  whom  live  by  hunting  and 
gathering,  are  to  be  found  in  the  neighborhood 
of  Kimali  to  the  west  of  Lake  Eyasi  and  number 
about  250  people.  Little  contact  occurs  be- 
tween the  Eastern  and  the  Western  Hadza: 
only  very  occasionally  have  individuals  moved 
temporarily  or,  more  rarely,  permanently  from 
one  of  these  areas  to  another.  Almost  all  my 
field  research,?  carried  out  continuously  from 
1958  until  i960,  and  again  for  short  periods  in 
1961,  1965,  1966,  and  1967,  was  done  among 
the  nomadic  Eastern  Hadza,  and  in  this  paper 


49 


50  Ecology  and  Economics 

I shall  refer  almost  exclusively  to  them.4 

Unlike  most  other  East  African  hunters  and 
gatherers,  the  Eastern  Hadza  are  relatively 
independent  of  their  agricultural  and  pastoral 
neighbors.  Although  they  rely  on  trade  and 
begging  to  obtain  tobacco,  cloth,  beads,  iron, 
and  other  goods,  they  have  not  entered  into  an 
elaborate  dependence  on,  or  interdependence 
with  their  neighbors.  In  this  respect  they  stand 
in  marked  contrast  to  the  Mbuti  Pygmies  of 
the  Congo  (Turnbull,  1965b  and  Chapter  15, 
this  volume)  and  the  Kenya  Dorobo  described 
by  Huntingford  (1954). 

The  small  numbers  of  the  Eastern  Hadza 
should  not  be  taken  as  evidence  that  they  are  a 
broken  down  remnant  of  some  much  larger 
group.  Their  numbers  have  been  quite  ade- 
quate to  maintain  their  language,  their  culture, 
and  their  social  organization;  there  is  no  evi- 
dence to  indicate  that  their  numbers  were 
either  much  greater  or  much  smaller  in  the 
past.  No  very  serious  epidemic,  no  large-scale 
war,  no  time  of  famine  is  remembered. 

Environment 

The  country  of  the  Eastern  Hadza,  dry,  rocky 
savanna,  dominated  by  thorn  scrub  and  acacia 
trees  and  infested  with  tsetse  flies,  has  been 
described  by  a traveler  who  walked  through  it 
in  1921  as  “a  barren  land  ...  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  a desert”  (Barns,  1923,  pp.  71-72). 
Barren  though  it  may  be  in  places,  the  country 
is  rich  in  wild  foods.  Animals  are  exceptionally 
numerous  and  were  certainly  even  commoner 
at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  Elephant, 
rhinoceros,  buffalo,  giraffe,  eland,  zebra,  wilde- 
beeste,  hartebeeste,  waterbuck,  impala,  Thom- 
son’s gazelle,  warthog,  baboon,  lion,  leopard, 
and  hyena  are  all  common,  as  are  smaller 
animals  such  as  anteater,  porcupine,  hare, 
hyrax,  dik-dik,  klipspringer,  jackal,  tortoise, 
and  many  others.  All  of  these  animals,  apart 
from  the  elephant,  are  hunted  and  eaten  by 
the  Hadza.  The  amount  of  meat  that  could  be 
regularly  harvested  without  endangering  the 
future  of  the  game  in  the  area  is  probably  as 
great  or  greater  than  anywhere  else  in  the 
world  where  hunters  and  gatherers  live  or  have 
lived  in  the  recent  past. 

Vegetable  food — roots,  berries,  the  fruit  of 


the  baobab  tree,  etc. — though  not  often  ob- 
vious to  the  casual  observer,  is  always  abun- 
dant even  at  the  height  of  the  dry  season  in  a 
year  of  drought.  The  type  of  vegetable  food 
available  is  different  in  the  six-month  wet 
season  from  the  dry  season?  but  there  is  no 
period  of  shortage.  The  honey  and  grubs  of 
seven  species  of  wild  bee  are  eaten;  supplies  of 
these  vary  widely  from  season  to  season  and 
from  year  to  year. 

Sources  of  water  are  widely  distributed  over 
the  country  in  the  wet  season  but  are  very  few 
in  the  dry  season.  The  Hadza  consider  that 
about  three  or  four  miles  is  the  maximum 
distance  over  which  water  can  reasonably  be 
carried  and  camps  are  normally  sited  within  a 
mile  of  a water  source. 

Part  of  the  country  consists  of  open  grass 
plains  but  the  Hadza  never  build  camps  there. 
Camps  are  invariably  sited  among  trees  or 
rocks  and,  by  preference,  among  both. 

Subsistence 

The  Eastern  Hadza  assert  no  rights  over  land 
and  its  ungarnered  resources.6  Any  individual 
may  live  wherever  he  likes  and  may  hunt 
animals,  collect  roots,  berries,  and  honey  and 
draw  water  anywhere  in  Hadza  country  with- 
out any  sort  of  restriction.  Not  only  do  the 
Hadza  not  parcel  out  their  land  and  its  re- 
sources among  themselves,  they  do  not  even 
seek  to  restrict  the  use  of  the  land  they  occupy 
to  members  of  their  own  tribe.  For  at  least  the 
last  fifty  years  outsiders  have  been  steadily 
encroaching  on  land  traditionally  occupied  by 

4.  The  ethnographic  information  given  in  this  paper 
refers  to  the  position  in  i960  at  the  end  of  my  main  period 
of  field  research.  Recently  most  of  the  nomadic  Hadza 
have  been  encouraged  to  settle  by  the  Tanzanian 
government. 

5.  The  rainfall  of,  on  average,  22.61  inches  a year  (at 
Yaida)  falls  almost  exclusively  during  the  period  Decem- 
ber to  May  with  peaks  in  December  and  March  (East 
African  Meteorological  Department — Summary  of  Rain- 
fall for  the  Year  1955). 

6.  Hadza  subsistence  is  described  in  an  ethnographic 
film,  The  Hadza , produced  in  1966.  Camera  Director: 
Sean  Hudson;  Anthropological  Director:  James  Wood- 
burn.  (16mm,  40  minutes,  black  and  white  with  sound.) 
Copies  are  available  from  the  author,  Department  of 
Anthropology,  London  School  of  Economics,  Aldwych, 
London,  WC  2,  England. 


Woodburn  An  Introduction  to  Hadza  Ecology  51 


the  Hadza,  and  by  eliminating  most  of  the 
game  and  destroying  much  of  the  vegetation 
in  the  areas  they  have  occupied,  they  have 
denied  the  use  of  most  of  these  areas  to  Hadza 
living  by  their  traditional  means  of  subsistence. 
However,  in  i960  the  Hadza  still  had  plenty  of 
land  and  abundant  resources.7 

In  spite  of  the  exceptional  numbers  of  game 
animals  in  their  area,  the  Hadza  rely  mainly 
on  wild  vegetable  matter  for  their  food.  Prob- 
ably as  much  as  80  per  cent  of  their  food  by 
weight  is  vegetable,  while  meat  and  honey  to- 
gether account  for  the  remaining  20  per  cent. 8 
In  terms  of  calories,  however,  meat  and  honey 
represent  far  more  than  20  per  cent  of  the 
total. 9 Although  a large  number  of  species  of 
plant  food  are  eaten,  only  a few  are  syste- 
matically gathered  and  provide  important 
quantities  of  food.  The  bulk  of  the  vegetable 
food  eaten  by  the  Hadza  is  in  fact  obtained 
from  only  ten  species  of  plant.  The  edible  part 
of  four  of  these  plants  is  the  root,10  of  five 
others  the  berry, 11  and  of  the  remaining  one  its 
large  fruit  which  contains  edible  pulp  and 
seeds  with  edible  kernels.” 

Vegetable  food  is  collected  almost  every  day 
by  the  women  of  the  camp  who  go  out  as  a 
group  or  groups  with  their  children.  They 
make  their  way  leisurely  to  the  place  where  the 
vegetable  food  is  to  be  found,  which  is  usually 

7.  A potentially  serious  situation  was  developing 
(Woodburn,  1962),  however,  in  that  the  annual  rate  of 
encroachment  had  increased  enormously  as  a result  of 
a very  large,  government-sponsored,  tsetse-clearance 
scheme.  If  encroachment  continued  at  this  rate,  serious 
pressures  were  likely  to  develop  within  a few  years.  The 
pressures  were  eased,  though,  by  the  cessation  of  the 
clearance  scheme  in  about  1963  and  by  the  settlement 
of  the  majority  of  the  Eastern  Hadza  in  1964  and  1965. 

8.  These  figures  are  very  approximate  as  they  are 
based  on  observation  but  not  on  measurement.  During 
field  work  in  1967  detailed  measurements  will,  ifpossihle, 
be  made. 

9.  The  calorific  values  of  Hadza  foods  are  at  present 
under  investigation. 

10.  Ipomoea  transvaalensis  Meeuse,  Coccinea  aurantiaca 
C.  Jeffrey,  Vigna  esculenta  (De  Wild.)  De  Wild,  ex  Th. 
et  H.  Dur,  and  Vigna  macrorhyncha  (Herms)  Milne-Redh. 

1 1 . Cordia  gharaf  Ehrenb,  Salvador  a persica  L. , Grewia 
pachycalyx  K.  Schum,  Grewia  bicolor  Juss,  and  Grewia 
similis  K.  Schum. 

12.  Adansonia  digitata  (Baobab  tree). 


within  an  hour’s  walk  of  the  camp.  Whatever 
the  type  of  vegetable  food,  a large  proportion 
is  eaten  where  it  is  gathered.  Berries  are 
quickly  and  easily  collected  and  are  eaten  raw. 
Roots  are  obtained  with  rather  more  difficulty; 
they  are  dug  up  with  a simple,  sharpened 
wooden  digging  stick  and  are,  in  most  cases, 
lightly  roasted  on  an  open  fire.  Only  the  food 
which  remains  after  the  women  and  children 
have  satisfied  their  hunger  is  brought  back  to 
camp  and,  even  of  the  food  brought  back  to 
camp,  less  than  half  is  given  to  the  men. 

Men  do  not  rely  on  the  women  to  supply 
them  with  all  the  vegetable  food  that  they  need. 
They  wander  off  into  the  bush  individually  for 
a while  almost  every  day  to  satisfy  their 
hunger.  They  gather  vegetable  food  only  for 
their  own  needs  and  normally  bring  none  back 
to  camp. 

Hunting  is  done  exclusively  by  men  and 
boys  and  is  an  essentially  individual  pursuit. 
A man  hunts  only  with  bow  and  arrow;  no 
guns,  spears,  traps,  nets,  or  snares  are  now  in 
use.  Hunting  procedure  is  simple  and  differs 
very  little  whether  the  target  is  a lion,  a zebra, 
or  a guinea  fowl.  Once  he  has  sighted  his 
quarry  the  solitary  hunter  stalks  it  slowly  and 
with  care  until  he  is,  if  possible,  25  yards  or 
less  away  and  then  attempts  a shot.  For  any 
animal  larger  than,  say,  a jackal,  a poisoned 
arrow  will  be  used.  An  animal  hit  with  a 
poisoned  arrow  will  usually  be  tracked  down 
only  after  an  interval  of  a couple  of  hours  to 
allow  the  poison  to  kill  the  animal  near  the 
place  where  it  is  shot.  To  track  it  earlier  might 
cause  it  to  run  for  many  miles  before  collapsing 
from  the  effect  of  the  poison.  Occasionally 
animals  are  shot  at  night  from  hides  over  water 
and  are  tracked  the  following  morning.  The 
large  animals  which  are  most  frequently  killed 
are  impala,  zebra,  eland,  and  giraffe. 

The  men,  like  the  women,  satisfy  their 
hunger  at  the  place  where  food  is  obtained.  A 
man  on  his  own  will  normally  light  a fire,  cook, 
and  eat  on  the  spot  any  small  animal  he  kills, 
and  only  after  he  is  satisfied  will  he  bring  meat 
back  to  camp  and,  even  there,  a small  animal 
is  as  likely  to  be  eaten  by  the  men  as  by  the 
women  and  children.  Men  and  women  are 
thus  unusually  independent  of  each  other  in 
obtaining  food.  This  arrangement  has  impor- 
tant implications  for  Hadza  social  structure 


52  Ecology  and  Economics 

which  will  be  discussed  in  detail  in  my  forth- 
coming monograph. 

Although  vegetable  foods  form  the  bulk  of 
their  diet,  the  Hadza  attach  very  little  value 
to  them.  They  think  of  themselves  and  describe 
themselves  as  hunters.  From  informants’  as- 
sertions, one  would  gather  that  little  but  meat 
is  eaten.  In  addition  to  being  the  preferred 
food,  meat  is  also  intimately  connected  with 
rituals  to  which  Hadza  men  attach  great 
importance. 

Honey,  although  highly  valued  as  a food,  is 
especially  important  as  a trading  commodity. 
Neighboring  tribesmen  use  honey  for  making 
beer  and  are  eager  to  obtain  it  in  trade. 

The  foods  which  Hadza  eat,  the  size  and  the 
positioning  of  their  camps,  the  activities  within 
the  camps  differ  markedly  between  the  dry  and 
wet  seasons.  These  differences  are  not  a simple 
product  of  ecological  factors.  In  Hadza  culture 
seasonal  polarity  is  stressed.  Activities  which 
are  characteristic  of  the  wet  season  tend  to  be 
avoided  during  the  dry  season  and  vice  versa. 
In  the  wet  season  the  emphasis  is  on  root 
gathering  and  hunting  small  game  especially 
hyrax;  in  the  dry  season  the  emphasis  is  on 
gathering  berries  and  hunting  large  animals. 
Camps  are  commonly  small  and  widely  dis- 
persed in  the  wet  season,  large  and  concen- 
trated near  the  few  available  sources  of  water 
in  the  dry  season.  In  the  small  camps  of  the 
wet  season  men  and  women  are  not  segregated 
to  any  great  extent  and  live  together  relatively 
harmoniously,  but  in  the  large  camps  of  the 
dry  season  sexually  segregated  activities  (such 
as  gambling)  are  stressed  and  the  opposition, 
even  hostility,  between  men  as  a group  and 
women  as  a group  is  reiterated. 

Ease  of  Subsistence 

Hunting  and  gathering  tribes  are  often  des- 
cribed as  living  on  the  verge  of  starvation.  It  is 
easy  to  gain  such  an  impression  after  living  for 
a short  while  with  the  Hadza;  often  by  night- 
fall every  scrap  of  food  in  the  camp  has  been 
eaten  unless  a large  animal  happens  to  have 
been  killed  recently.  Moreover  the  Hadza 
place  such  emphasis  on  meat  as  proper  food 
and  treat  vegetable  foods  as  so  thoroughly  un- 
satisfactory in  comparison  that  they  are  apt  to 


describe  themselves  as  suffering  from  hunger 
when  they  have  less  meat  than  they  would  like. 
In  fact,  there  is  never  any  general  shortage  of 
food  even  in  time  of  drought.  The  range  of 
foods  in  the  bush  is  so  great,  if  one  knows  what 
these  are  and  how  to  obtain  them,  that  if 
weather  conditions  should  cause  the  failure  of 
some  type  of  root  or  berry,  or  the  migration 
of  some  of  the  game,  some  other  type  of  food 
is  always  available.  For  a Hadza  to  die  of 
hunger,  or  even  to  fail  to  satisfy  his  hunger  for 
more  than  a day  or  two,  is  almost  inconceiv- 
able. 

I have  already  mentioned  the  exceptional 
abundance  of  game  animals  in  this  area.  Al- 
though Hadza,  in  common  probably  with  all 
other  human  societies,  do  not  eat  all  the  types 
of  animal  available  to  them — they  reject  civet, 
monitor  lizard,  snake,  terrapin  among  others — 
they  do  eat  an  unusually  wide  range  of  animals 
including  predators  such  as  lion,  leopard, 
serval,  wild  cat  and  scavengers  such  as  hyena, 
jackal,  vulture.*3  With  their  very  powerful 
bows  and  their  poisoned  arrows  they  are  able 
to  kill  without  any  great  difficulty  all  the 
animals  in  the  area  with  the  sole  exception  of 
elephant,  which  are  too  large  to  be  killed  by 
the  type  of  poison  they  use.  In  spite  of  the  large 
number  of  species  which  they  are  both  able  to 
hunt  and  regard  as  edible,  the  Hadza  do  not 
kill  very  many  animals  and  it  is  probable  that 
even  in  the  radically  reduced  area  they  oc- 
cupied in  i960  more  animals  could  have  been 
killed  of  every  species  without  endangering  the 
survival  of  any  species  in  the  area. 

The  low  opinion  which  Hadza  have  of  the 
vegetable  food  which  makes  up  the  bulk  of 
their  diet  is  not  surprising  when  its  unpala- 
tability  is  taken  into  account.  Roots  are,  in 
general,  tough,  fibrous,  and  have  little  taste; 
many  of  the  berries  are  hard  and  dry  and  con- 
tain large  stones  which  are  swallowed  whole; 
undushi  berries  leave  a dry,  sticky  residuum  in 
the  mouth;  k’alahai  berries  split  the  lips  and 
tongue  if  eaten  in  quantity.  Very  little  of  the 
vegetable  food  is  eaten  with  much  enthusiasm. 
But  the  advantage  of  vegetable  food  over  meat 
(or  honey),  and  the  basic  reason  why  it  consti- 
tutes the  bulk  of  the  diet  of  the  Hadza,  is  that 

13.  Some  individuals  will  not  eat  some  of  these 
animals  especially  when  strangers  are  present. 


it  can  be  obtained  quickly  and,  above  all,  pre- 
dictably. When  they  go  out  to  look  for 
vegetable  food,  the  women  can  be  sure  that 
they  will  find  some  type  without  undue  effort. 
Hunting,  even  by  a highly  skilled  hunter,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  always  an  unpredictable 
pursuit  and  therefore  one  which  is  less  suitable 
as  a basis  for  day-to-day  subsistence. 

With  food  of  some  sort  always  available,  the 
Hadza  give  little  attention  to  the  conservation 
of  their  food  resources.  When  women  dig  up 
roots,  they  do  not  attempt  to  replace  any  por- 
tion of  the  plant  to  grow  again.  When  they 
gather  berries,  heavily  laden  branches  are  often 
torn  from  the  trees  and  carried  back  to  camp. 
When  a woman  is  building  the  framework  of 
her  grass  hut,  she  is  as  likely  to  use  branches 
from  berry  trees  as  from  any  other  type  of  tree 
that  happens  to  be  near  at  hand.  The  Hadza 
may  inadvertently  assist  in  propagating  berry 
trees  in  their  locality  by  their  practice  of 
swallowing  the  berry  stones  which  pass  intact 
through  the  digestive  tract,  but  they  make  no 
deliberate  effort  to  conserve  the  trees  and  other 
food-producing  plants. 

When  a nest  of  wild  bees  is  found  and  raided 
for  its  honey,  no  portion  of  the  comb  is  left  to 
encourage  the  bees  to  stay  on.  Moreover,  little 
effort  is  made  to  leave  the  nest  suitable  for 
reoccupation.  If  the  nest  is  in  a hollow  tree  and 
the  entrance  has  been  cut  open  with  an  axe  to 
extract  the  comb,  the  hollow  will  not  again  be 
used  by  bees  unless  the  hole  through  which  the 
comb  has  been  extracted  is  partially  blocked. 
When  there  happens  to  be  a stone  of  suitable 
size  near  at  hand,  this  may  be  wedged  into  the 
hole  in  the  hope  that  the  bees  will  later  return 
and  reoccupy  the  hollow.  As  often  as  not, 
though,  the  hole  will  be  left  unblocked;  people 
do  not  feel  obliged  to  attend  to  this  task  and  do 
not  bother  about  it  unless  they  can  do  so  very 
easily. 

In  hunting  no  attempt  is  made  at  systematic 
cropping.  A man  out  hunting  will  shoot  any 
animal  he  comes  across.  There  are  no  inhi- 
bitions about  shooting  females  (even  pregnant 
females)  or  immature  animals.  Adult  males 
are  preferred  but  only  because  they  are  gen- 
erally larger.  Hadza  do  not  often  kill  more 
animals  than  they  need  but  this  is  only  because 
hunting  requires  effort  and  they  see  no  virtue 
in  hunting  unless  they  are  hungry  for  meat. 


Woodburn  An  Introduction  to  Hadza  Ecology  53 

Meat  may  sometimes  be  wasted:  if  a large 
animal  is  killed  by  a man  of  a small  camp,  some 
t of  the  less  palatable  portions  may  be  left  behind 
for  the  vultures  and  hyenas.  If  two  animals  are 
1 killed  on  the  same  day,  the  more  distant  one 
: may  be  abandoned.  When  tracking  an  animal 

: wounded  by  a poisoned  arrow,  it  will  com- 

monly be  abandoned  if  it  is  not  found  in  one 
: day’s  tracking. 

l In  camp  meat  is  widely  distributed  and 

> rapidly  consumed.'4  The  Hadza  are  familiar 
with  techniques  for  drying  meat  in  the  sun 

' and  could,  if  they  wished,  preserve  stocks  for 
i months,  at  least  in  the  dry  season.  But  in  prac- 
tice meat  is  rarely  preserved:  it  is  eaten  in 
f large  quantities  until  it  is  finished.  Meat  should 

> be  shared  with  those  who  ask  for  it.  In  par- 

: ticular  pregnant  women  have  the  right  to  eat 

1 meat  belonging  to  anybody.'5  To  eat  meat 
r slowly,  to  preserve  it  and  store  it  would  be 
f largely  wasted  effort : other  people  would 
: simply  demand  meat  when  their  own  was 

> finished  and  it  would  be  wrong  to  refuse 
them. 

Hunting  is  not  a coordinated  activity.  Men 
l hunt  individually  and  decide  for  themselves 
) where  and  when  they  will  go  hunting.  When 
: a man  goes  off  into  the  bush  with  his  bow  and 

arrows,  his  main  interest  is  usually  to  satisfy 
1 his  hunger.  Once  he  has  satisfied  his  hunger  by 
) eating  berries  or  by  shooting  and  catching 
some  small  animal,  he  is  unlikely  to  make 
much  effort  to  shoot  a large  animal.  Of  course, 
if  he  sees  an  animal  close  by  which  can  easily 
be  hunted,  he  will  almost  always  take  the 
opportunity.  Men  most  often  return  from  the 
1 bush  empty-handed  but  with  their  hunger 
, satisfied. 

: During  the  dry  season  Hadza  men  spend 

) much  more  time  gambling  than  hunting.  The 
r gambling  game,  played  with  bark  disks,  is  a 
game  of  chance  in  which  skill  plays  hardly  any 
: part.  The  most  usual  and  most  acceptable 

r stake  is  a metal-headed  arrow,  preferably  of  the 
poisoned  type.  In  the  course  of  a day  arrows 
t (and  other  possessions  which  are  staked)  will 
s change  hands  hundreds  of  times.  In  practice, 

14.  The  system  of  distribution  will  be  described  in 
- my  forthcoming  monograph. 

15.  Except  for  certain  portions  known  as  epeme  meat 
which  are  reserved  for  the  initiated  men. 


54  Ecology  and  Economics 

the  majority  of  men  in  dry  season  camps  where 
gambling  is  being  carried  on  will  often  have 
lost  all  their  metal-headed  arrows  and  will 
therefore  be  unable  to  hunt  big  game.  Arrows 
without  metal  heads  which  are  suitable  for 
hunting  birds  and  small  animals  are  not  used 
as  gambling  stakes.  Men  are,  then,  able  to 
satisfy  their  hunger  easily  enough  during  the 
dry  season  when  gambling  is  going  on,  but 
they  spend  little  time  hunting  big  game  due  to 
their  lack  of  suitable  arrows  or  their  desire  to 
conserve  whatever  arrows  they  possess  for 
gambling  purposes. 

Many  men  are,  in  any  case,  quite  unpre- 
pared or  unable  to  hunt  big  game  even  when 
they  possess  the  necessary  arrows.  Large 
animals  are  killed  by  a small  minority  of  the 
adult  men.  Perhaps  as  many  as  half  of  the  adult 
men  fail  to  kill  even  one  large  animal  a year. 
The  active  hunters  are  usually  men  in  their 
late  teens,  or  in  their  twenties  or  thirties;  few 
men  continue  to  hunt  large  game  actively  after 
the  age  of  45.  There  are  some  men  who  have 
killed  scarcely  a single  large  animal  during 
their  entire  adult  lives.  Whether  a man  hunts 
is  his  own  affair.  Other  men  will  not  put  pres- 
sure on  him.  He  may,  though,  find  it  more 
difficult  to  marry  a wife,  or,  once  married,  to 
keep  a wife,  if  he  is  unsuccessful  in  hunting  big 
game. 

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  Hadza  make 
scarcely  any  attempt  to  conserve  the  food  re- 
sources of  their  area,  that  they  rapidly  eat  all 
the  food  which  comes  into  camp  without  pre- 
serving it,  that  they  do  not  cooperate  very 
much  or  Coordinate  their  food  gathering  ac- 
tivities with  each  other,  that  they  make  hunting 
difficult  for  themselves  by  using  their  arrows 
for  gambling,  that  a high  proportion  of  men 
are  failures  at  hunting,  they  nonetheless  obtain 
sufficient  food  without  undue  effort.  Over  the 
year  as  a whole  probably  an  average  of  less 
than  two  hours  a day  is  spent  obtaining  food.16 
There  are  seasonal  variations  and  variations 
from  year  to  year  but  not  very  considerable 
ones. 

We  have  good  evidence  that  the  food  they 
eat  is  adequate  nutritionally.  In  i960  I was 

16.  This  figure  is  a very  rough  approximation  and  will 
probably  have  to  be  altered  when  adequate  measure- 
ments are  made. 


visited  in  the  field  by  D.  B.  Jelliffe  and  F.  J. 
Bennett  of  Makerere  College  Medical  School, 
and  they  examined  62  Hadza  children.  Accord- 
ing to  their  report,  “the  clinical  nutritional 
status  of  all  the  children  was  good  by  tropical 
standards;  in  particular,  the  syndromes  of 
kwashiorkor  and  nutritional  marasmus,  rickets, 
infantile  scurvy,  and  vitamin  B deficiency  syn- 
dromes were  not  seen.”  In  1966  and  1967  Dr. 
Bennett,  this  time  in  cooperation  with  N.  A. 
Barnicot  and  myself,  did  further  work  on 
Hadza  nutrition.  More  than  450  Hadza  were 
examined  in  detail ; some  of  these  were  resident 
in  settlements,  others  were  still  living  in  the 
bush  by  their  traditional  means  of  subsistence. 
The  nutritional  status  of  those  who  were  resi- 
dent in  the  bush  was  again  found  to  be  good  by 
tropical  standards. 

My  impression  is  that,  over  the  year  as  a 
whole,  the  Hadza  spend  less  energy  (and  prob- 
ably less  time)  obtaining  their  subsistence 
than  do  neighboring  agricultural  tribes,  but 
until  detailed  comparative  research  is  done 
the  matter  must  remain  in  doubt.  From  a 
nutritional  point  of  view  the  Hadza  again  ap- 
pear to  be  better  off  than  their  agricultural 
neighbors  although  to  establish  this,  too,  more 
research  is  needed.  It  is  clear  that  agricultura- 
lists are  liable  to  suffer  from  recurrent  famine 
in  this  area  while  hunters  and  gatherers  are 
not.  In  the  early  years  of  this  century,  before 
the  colonial  government  provided  effective 
famine  relief  measures,  numerous  Isanzu  took 
to  the  bush  from  time  to  time  and  lived  like 
the  Hadza  on  bush  produce  until  the  famine 
eased  and  they  were  able  to  return  to  cultiva- 
tion. Some  stayed  on  and  intermarried  with 
the  Hadza.  In  general  the  bush  plants  on 
which  the  Hadza  mainly  rely  yield  with  great 
regularity;  failure  is  far  rarer  than  it  is  with 
vulnerable,  introduced  cultivated  plants  such 
as  maize  and  other  cereals  grown  by  neighbor- 
ing peoples.  In  comparison  with  their  agricul- 
tural neighbors  the  Hadza  are  well  protected 
against  the  dangers  of  famine.  They  are 
doubly  protected  by  the  diversity  of  the  food 
supplies  available  and  by  the  lesser  vulner- 
ability of  wild  plants  to  such  natural  hazards 
as  drought,  insects,  and  birds.  Hadza  prefer 
maize  and  millet  meal  porridge  to  their  own 
unappetizing  berries  and  roots  but,  until  the 
recent  settlement  schemes  were  initiated  in 


Woodburn  An  Introduction  to  Hadza  Ecology  55 


1964,  they  did  not  in  general  think  these  foods 
were  worth  all  the  effort  and  uncertainty  of 
cultivation. 

Perhaps  largely  because  of  the  temporal 
priority  of  hunting  and  gathering,  there  has 
been  a widespread  tendency  to  see  it  as  a 
hard  and  demanding  way  of  life  in  which  the 
necessities  of  the  food  quest  dominate  people’s 
lives.  With  the  Hadza  this  is  clearly  not  the 


case  and  judging  from  some  of  the  other  papers 
in  this  volume,  they  may  not  be  exceptional.  I 
have  sought  to  show  that  the  Hadza  meet  their 
nutritional  needs  easily  without  much  effort, 
much  forethought,  much  equipment,  or  much 
organization.  The  social  implications  are  im- 
portant and  will  be  discussed  partly  in  a 
second  paper  in  this  volume  and  partly  in  my 
forthcoming  monograph. 


6. 


Coping  with  Abundance  : 
Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast 


WAYNE  SUTTEES 


Although  the  aboriginal  peoples  of  the  North- 
west coast  of  North  America  were  not  hunters 
so  much  as  fishermen,  they  seem  especially 
worth  including  in  a survey  of  Man  the 
Hunter  for  two  reasons:  First,  their  rich, 
maritime,  temperate-zone  habitat  is  a type  in 
which  few  food-gathering  peoples  survived 
until  historic  times,  partly  because  this  very 
type  of  habitat  elsewhere  saw  the  growth  of 
more  advanced  forms  of  subsistence.1  Second, 
the  Northwest  coast  peoples  seem  to  have 
attained  the  highest  known  levels  of  cultural 
complexity  achieved  on  a food-gathering  base 
and  among  the  highest  known  levels  of  popula- 
tion density.  The  Northwest  coast  refutes  many 
seemingly  easy  generalizations  about  people 
without  horticulture  or  herds.  Here  were 
people  with  permanent  houses  in  villages  of 
more  than  a thousand;  social  stratification, 
including  a hereditary  caste  of  slaves  and 
ranked  nobility;  specialization  in  several  kinds 
of  hunting  and  fishing,  crafts,  and  curing; 
social  units  larger  than  villages;  elaborate  cere- 
monies; and  one  of  the  world’s  great  art  styles. 
The  area  appears  to  have  been  matched  in 
population  density,  among  food-gathering 
areas,  by  only  two  or  three  areas  adjacent  to 
it — California  and  parts  of  the  Arctic  and  Pla- 
teau culture  areas.  (Kroeber,  1939 ; but  it  would 
be  good  to  have  comparable  data  for  the  Ainu 

56 


and  the  Lower  Amur  peoples.)  These  feature 
of  Northwest  coast  culture  and  demography 
are  generally  thought  to  have  been  made  pos- 
sible, or  even  inevitably  produced,  by  the  rich- 
ness of  the  habitat  of  the  area  and  the  efficiency 
of  the  subsistence  techniques  of  its  peoples. 
Perhaps,  then,  the  study  of  Northwest  coast 
subsistence  can  offer  some  guidance  in  esti- 
mating the  possibilities  of  cultural  development 
under  comparable  conditions  in  prehistoric 
times.  (See  Chapter  1,  this  volume.) 

In  a short  paper  I cannot  hope  to  do  justice 
to  the  variety  and  complexity  of  Northwest 
coast  culture  and  its  historic  relations  (for  a 
general  survey,  see  Drucker,  1955,  1 965) ,2  nor 
to  go  into  the  problem  of  aboriginal  population 
sizes  and  densities  except  to  comment  that 
Mooney’s  and  Kroeber’s  figures  (Kroeber, 
1939,  pp.  131  ff.)  have  generally  been  revised 
upwards  (Baumhoff,  1963,  pp.  157-61;  Duff, 
1964,  pp.  38—46;  H.  Taylor,  1963).  I shall 
simply  take  the  cultural  complexity  and  popu- 
lation density  as  proven,  and  discuss  our 

1.  The  Ainu,  described  in  this  volume  by  Watanabe, 
Chap.  7,  are  perhaps  the  food-gathering  people  in  the 
most  similar  habitat,  but  northwestern  North  America 
is  climatically  more  like  northwestern  Europe  than  like 
northeastern  Asia. 

2.  A complete  bibliography  of  the  area  may  be  found 
in  Murdock,  i960. 


Suttles  Coping  with  Abundance:  Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast 


57 


Figure  i.  Indians  of  the  Northwest  Coast. 


58  Ecology  and  Economics 

knowledge  of  subsistence  and  its  relationship  to 
them.  But  as  you  will  see,  I do  not  consider  the 
relationship  a simple  one  and  so  I must  range 
through  several  sorts  of  phenomena.  In 
general,  my  thesis  is  that  while  the  habitat  was 
undeniably  rich,  abundance  did  not  exist  the 
year  round  but  only  here  and  there  and  now 
and  then, and  that  such  temporary  abundances 
— though  they  may  well  be  a necessary  condi- 
tion for  population  density  and  cultural  devel- 
opment of  the  sort  seen  on  the  Northwest  coast 
— are  not  sufficient  to  create  them.  Equally 
necessary  conditions  were  the  presence  of  good 
though  limited  food-getting  techniques,  food- 
storing techniques,  a social  system  providing 
the  organization  for  subsistence  activities  and 
permitting  exchanges,  and  a value  system  that 
provided  the  motivation  for  getting  food, 
storing  food,  and  participating  fully  in  the 
social  system.  I shall  deal  with  each  of  these 
conditions  in  succession. 


Habitat 

The  Northwest  coast  was  an  area  where  one 
could  find,  on  a single  occasion,  cfuite  literally 
tons  of  food.  Salmon  ran  into  the  smaller 
streams  by  the  thousands  and  into  larger 
streams  by  the  tens  and  hundreds  of  thousands. 
Waterfowl  came  to  the  marshes  by  the  tens 
and  hundreds  of  thousands.  A single  sturgeon 
can  weigh  nearly  a ton,  a bull  sea  lion  more 
than  a ton,  a whale  up  to  thirty  tons.  But  this 
aspect  of  the  Northwest  coast  habitat  is  only 
too  well  known.  It  has  been  so  emphasized 
that  the  implications  of  the  phrase  used  above, 
“on  a single  occasion,”  have  been  ignored  and 
the  habitat  has  been  presented  as  a constant 
source  of  plenty.  But  as  I have  said  elsewhere 
(Suttles,  i960,  1962),  it  was  not  constant.  It 
did  not  provide  an  ever-reliable  abundance  of 
natural  resources  simply  there  for  the  taking. 
Abundance  there  consisted  only  of  certain 

3.  The  coast  Salish  groups  with  whom  I have  worked 
on  and  off  for  a number  of  years  are  the  speakers  of  the 
Halkomelem  and  Straits  languages,  whose  territory 
includes  the  lower  Fraser  valley,  the  southern  end  of 
Georgia  Strait,  and  the  northern  shores  of  the  Strait  of 
Juan  de  Fuca.  Since  they  are  roughly  at  the  center  of 
the  total  coast  Salish  area,  I call  them  the  central  coast 
Salish. 


things  at  certain  places  at  certain  times  and 
always  with  some  possibility  of  failure.  Des- 
cribing the  central  coast  Salish3  habitat,  I 
wrote : 

The  environmental  setting  of  native  culture  was 
characterized  by  four  significant  features:  1) 
variety  of  types  of  food,  including  sprouts,  roots, 
berries,  shellfish,  fishes,  waterfowl,  land  and  sea 
mammals;  2)  local  variation  in  the  occurrence  of 
these  types,  due  to  irregular  shorelines,  broken 
topography,  differences  between  fresh  and  salt 
water,  local  differences  in  temperature  and  preci- 
pitation; 3)  seasonal  variation,  especially  in  vege- 
table foods  and  in  anadromous  fishes;  4)  fluctua- 
tion from  year  to  year,  in  part  due  to  the  regular 
cycles  of  the  different  populations  of  fish,  in  part 
to  less  predictable  changes,  as  in  weather  (i960, 
p.  302;  see  also  Suttles,  1962,  pp.  527-29). 

In  their  subsistence  activities,  the  central  coast 
Salish  had  to  cope  with  these  variable  features 
of  the  habitat.  It  seems  likely  that  farther 
north  on  the  coast  there  were  fewer  types  of 
resources  but  greater  concentrations  and  thus 
possibly  greater  dangers  in  failure,  through 
human  error  or  natural  calamity,  of  resources 
to  appear  at  the  right  place  at  the  right  time 
(1962,  pp.  530-33).  Farther  south  I would  ex- 
pect the  opposite  to  hold.  But  these  subareal 
differences  have  yet  to  be  worked  out. 

One  cause  of  unexpected  hardship  was 
purely  climatic.  Because  of  the  Japan  Current 
and  prevailingly  westerly  winds  from  the  ocean, 
the  weather  is  usually  mild  and  damp.  Sum- 
mers are  cool  and  during  many  winters  the 
temperature  only  now  and  again  drops  below 
the  freezing  point.  In  the  central  coast  Salish 
area,  winters  without  frost  are  not  unknown. 
But  occasionally  masses  of  extremely  cold  con- 
tinental air  break  out  through  the  coast  moun- 
tains to  bring  periods  of  as  much  as  ten  days 
of  near-zero  (Fahrenheit)  weather  to  the  outer 
coast.  In  British  Columbia  such  severe  out- 
breaks have  been  recorded  at  twelve-  to 
eighteen-year  intervals  (Young,  1943,  pp.  xli- 
xlii). 

From  a number  of  places  along  the  coast  we 
have  indications  that  there  were  times  when 
food  was  scarce.  For  groups  dependent  upon 
the  open  ocean,  the  cause  was  usually  a stretch 
of  bad  weather;  for  groups  on  rivers,  it  was 


Suttles  Coping  with  Abundance:  Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast 


tardiness  or  failure  in  a fish  run.  In  both  situa- 
tions it  was  of  course  also  a matter  of  human 
failure  to  have  accumulated  enough  food  for 
the  emergency. 

For  the  Haida  of  the  Queen  Charlotte  islands 
we  have  a statement  by  an  early  observer, 
Poole,  quoted  by  Niblack,  who  writes: 

Some  of  these  berries  are  collected  and  dried 
for  winter’s  use,  forming,  with  dried  fish,  the 
principal  winter’s  supply.  Poole,  (1863)  says  of 
the  Haida,  that  they  often,  through  feasting  or 
improvidence,  eat  up  all  the  dried  berries  before 
spring,  and  “were  it  not  for  a few  bulbs  which 
they  dig  out  of  the  soil  in  the  early  spring-time, 
while  awaiting  the  halibut  season,  numbers  of 
Indians  really  would  starve  to  death”  (Niblack, 
1890,  pp.  276-77). 

For  the  Tsimshian  of  the  Nass  and  Skeena 
rivers  we  have  Boas’s  statement,  derived  from 
his  analysis  of  Tsimshian  mythology,  that 
“sometimes  when  the  olachen  were  late  in 
coming,  there  would  be  a famine  on  Nass 
River”  (Boas,  1916,  p.  399).  In  his  comparison 
of  Tsimshian  data  with  Kwakiutl  data  in 
Kwakiutl  Culture  as  Reflected  in  Mythology,  Boas 
writes : 

The  difficulties  of  obtaining  an  adequate  food 
supply  must  have  been  much  more  serious  among 
the  Tsimshian  than  among  the  Kwakiutl,  for 
starvation  and  the  rescue  of  the  tribe  by  the 
deeds  of  a great  hunter  or  by  supernatural  help 
are  an  ever-recurring  theme  which,  among  the 
Kwakiutl,  is  rather  rare.  One  story  of  this  type 
is  clearly  a Tsimshian  story  retold.  . . . Starvation 
stories  of  the  Kwakiutl  occur  particularly  among 
thie  tribes  living  at  the  heads  of  the  inlets  of  the 
mainland,  not  among  those  who  dwell  near  the 
open  sea,  where  seals,  sealions,  salmon  and  halibut 
are  plentiful  (Boas.  1935,  p.  171;  see  other  re- 
ferences in  Piddocke,  1965,  p.  247). 

For  the  Nootka,  who  occupy  the  west  coast 
of  Vancouver  Island  in  less  sheltered  waters 
than  the  Kwakiutl,  we  have  Drucker’s  state- 
ment that  a poor  dog  salmon  or  herring  run 
followed  by  weather  bad  enough  to  prevent 
people  from  going  out  for  cod  or  halibut 
“quickly  brought  privation”  when  people 
sought  foods  they  ordinarily  disdained.  Fie  cites 


59 

Father  Brabant’s  report  of  “two  successive 
springs  at  Hesquiat  when  pickings  were  lean 
and  children  cried  out  with  hunger,  until  the 
weather  abated  enough  for  the  fishermen  to 
go  out.”  He  also  cites  family  traditions  of  the 
hardships  of  winters  on  the  outer  coast  before 
alliances  had  been  made  with  groups  with  sal- 
mon streams  (Drucker,  1951,  pp.  36-37). 

Swan  says  of  the  Makah  at  Cape  Flattery : 

The  ease  with  which  these  Indians  can  obtain 
their  subsistence  from  the  ocean  makes  them 
improvident  in  laying  in  supplies  for  winter  use, 
except  of  halibut;  for,  on  any  day  in  the  year 
when  the  weather  will  permit,  they  can  procure, 
in  a few  hours,  provisions  enough  to  last  them  for 
several  days  (1870,  p.  30). 

Yet  he  later  (p.  76)  describes  a period  in 
April  of  1864  when  the  weather  did  not  permit 
going  out  fishing  or  whaling  and  how  the 
Ozette  were  concerned  enough  about  this  to 
accuse  an  old  man  of  sorcery  and  threaten  to 
kill  him  if  he  didn’t  stop  his  incantations  and 
make  fair  weather.  The  Quileute,  Swan  was 
told,  had  killed  an  alleged  sorcerer  for  bringing 
bad  weather  during  the  halibut  season  only  a 
few  summers  earlier. 

Discussing  relations  between  the  upper  and 
lower  classes  among  the  Chinook  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Columbia  River,  Ray  (1938,  p.  56)  says 
that  his  principal  informant  “declared  that  the 
upper  class  could  infringe  as  much  as  it  pleased 
upon  the  lower  classes  and  added  that  famine 
was  unknown  to  the  former  since  the  food  of 
the  latter  was  appropriated  in  such  a circum- 
stance.” Ray  adds  that  the  informant’s  speci- 
fic examples  were  the  acts  of  chiefs.  In  the  con- 
text of  Ray’s  other  statements,  it  appears  that 
the  Chinook  village  chief  received,  or  seized, 
tribute  and  redistributed  food  to  his  people, 
favoring  the  upper  class.  My  point  in  citing 
this  is  simply  to  indicate  that  shortages  were 
conceivable. 

Finally,  we  have  Gould’s  (1966)  recent  re- 
analysis of  the  wealth  quest  among  the  Tolowa, 
an  Athapaskan-speaking  people  on  the  Oregon- 
California  border.  This  is  the  group  described 
by  DuBois  (1936)  as  having  distinctly  separate 
“subsistence”  and  “prestige”  economies  in  the 
paper  that  first  introduced  these  terms  into  the 
study  of  primitive  economies.  According  to 


60  Ecology  and  Economics 

DuBois,  subsistence  was  not  a problem; 
scarcity  existed  only  in  “treasures”  (dentalia 
shells,  obsidian  blades,  and  woodpecker  scalps) ; 
food  circulated  freely  in  a “subsistence 
economy,”  while  men  bent  their  efforts  in  gain- 
ing prestige  through  amassing  wealth  in  the 
“prestige  economy.”  But  Gould  has  found  no 
separate  “subsistence  economy”  in  that  there  is 
no  evidence  for  specialization  in  subsistence  or 
the  exchange  of  foods.  There  do  appear,  how- 
ever, to  have  been  differences  in  the  produc- 
tivity of  households  due  in  part  to  differences 
in  the  number  of  women  available  to  process 
foods  in  season.  It  is  true  that  “treasure”  items 
were  not  constantly  used  to  buy  food,  nor 
ideally  nor  publicly  so  used,  but  they  were 
commonly  used  to  buy  food  during  periods  of 
shortage.  In  fact,  storing  food  to  sell  to  others 
was  recognized  as  an  important  method  of 
acquiring  wealth;  hence  the  interest  the  Tolo- 
wa  show  in  acquiring  women,  the  processors 
of  food.  Wealth  is  converted  into  prestige  by  its 
use  in  ceremonial  displays  and  in  payment  of 
bride  price,  which  establishes  the  social  status 
of  children  to  the  marriage  (Gould,  1966, 
pp.  70,  77,  86).  Thus  recognition  of  the  exis- 
tence of  periods  of  shortage  and  of  problems  in 
subsistence  has  made  possible  a reinterpreta- 
tion of  the  data  that  give  them  a greater  co- 
herence than  in  the  earlier  analyses.4  There  is 
really  only  one  Tolowa  economy;  in  it  food  is 
converted  into  wealth  and  wealth  is  converted 
into  prestige.  Occasional  shortages  of  food  pro- 
vided the  occasions  for  converting  wealth  into 
food.  Hungry  people  wanted  food;  greedy 
people  wanted  wealth.  Why  did  the  greedy 
want  wealth?  Because  wealth  brought  prestige. 
Gould  does  not  ask  why  the  Tolowa  sought 
prestige.  But  it  seems  likely  that  it  was  because 
indirectly  prestige-seeking  enabled  hungry 
people  to  obtain  food.  Or,  if  this  seems  to  imply 

4.  The  fact  of  shortages  in  the  Tolowa  area  was  not 
just  recently  discovered.  Driver,  in  his  element  list  for 
northwestern  California,  under  “Slaves,”  shows  that 
“Starving  person  gives  self  for  keep”  was  affirmed  by 
his  Tolowa  informant,  one  of  his  two  Karok  informants, 
and  both  Yurok,  while  “Girls  traded  for  food  in  time  of 
famine”  was  affirmed  by  the  Tolowa  and  both  Yurok 
(Driver,  1939,  p.  357).  But  Gould  (1966)  has  indicated 
the  relevance  of  the  fact  to  the  Tolowa  socioeconomic 
system.  For  a suggestion  regarding  the  relevance  of  the 
exchange  of  girls  for  food  to  residence  rules,  see  the  last 
section  of  this  paper. 


conscious  purposiveness,  we  may  say  it  is 
because  populations  that  have  unconsciously 
stumbled  on  ways  of  feeding  hungry  members 
survive  better  than  those  who  let  them  starve. 

I have  dwelt  at  length  on  the  existence  of 
times  of  scarcity  on  the  Northwest  coast  pre- 
cisely because  recognizing  their  existence  may 
be  essential  to  our  understanding  of  the  com- 
plexities of  Northwest  coast  culture.  Some 
years  ago  Bartholomew  and  Birdsell  pointed 
out  that  it  is  a firmly  established  ecological 
generalization,  known  as  “Liebig’s  law  of  the 
minimum,”  that  the  size  of  a population  is  de- 
termined not  by  the  mean  condition  but  by  the 
extremes.  “A  semi-arid  area  may  have  many 
fruitful  years  in  succession,  but  a single 
drought  year  occurring  once  in  a human  gener- 
ation may  restrict  the  population  to  an  other- 
wise inexplicably  low  density”  (Bartholomew 
and  Birdsell,  1953,  pp.  487-88;  see  also  com- 
ment by  Sherwood  L.  Washburn  and  June 
Helm,  Chapter  9a,  this  volume).  Perhaps,  also, 
a single,  once-a-generation  failure  of  a major 
fish  run  or  prolonged  period  of  severe  weather 
may  explain  an  otherwise  inexplicable  practice 
such  as  the  Northwest  coast  search  for  prestige. 

What  we  need  to  know  for  the  whole  coast  is 
not  merely  what  resources  were  present  and 
when  and  where  they  were  found  under  ordi- 
nary conditions,  but  also  the  minimal  occur- 
rences in  space,  time,  and  quantity.  This 
means  we  should  pay  special  attention  to  what 
foods  are,  or  were,  available  in  winter,  even 
though  winter  was  culturally  defined  by  most 
peoples  of  the  area  as  the  ceremonial  season 
during  which  people  lived  on  stored  food.  As 
we  have  seen  from  the  quotations  given,  stored 
food  was  not  always  available.  It  also  appears 
that  there  were  differences  between  inland 
river  environments,  sheltered  saltwater  bays, 
and  the  open  ocean  shores.  There  were  prob- 
ably also  differences  from  south  to  north. 
None  of  these  has  been  worked  out  in  detail, 
but  I am  confident,  that,  with  the  growing 
body  of  biological  and  climatological  data  on 
the  area,  we  shall  one  day  be  able  to  state  fairly 
accurately  what  the  resource  base  of  each 
people’s  territory  was . 

Of  course  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  be- 
tween what  foods  could  have  been  hunted, 
fished,  and  gathered,  and  those  foods  actually 
obtained  in  practice.  The  difference  between 


Suttles  Coping  with  Abundance : Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast 


potential  and  actual  is  in  part  a function  of  the 
efficiency  of  food-getting  methods. 

Food-Getting  Methods 

The  state  of  our  knowledge  in  this  respect,  too, 
is  certainly  not  as  good  as  we  would  want  it. 
We  do  not  have  and  probably  shall  never  have 
any  figures  on  the  quantities  of  food  actually 
collected  and  consumed  per  capita,  on  the  ratio 
of  meat,  .fish,  and  vegetable  food  in  the  diet, 5 
on  the  number  of  man-hours  spent  in  the  food 
quest,  and  on  percent  of  the  population  sup- 
ported in  leisure  or  other  non-subsistence 
activities.  Moreover,  for  much  of  the  area  we 
do  not  even  have  the  facts  in  the  form  of  good 

5.  While  going  through  central  coast  Salish  material 
for  the  symposium,  I guessed  that  in  the  diet  of  adults, 
vegetable  foods  would  have  amounted  to  less  than  io 
per  cent  of  volume  but  might  have  been  higher  for 
children,  who  probably  foraged  for  such  things  as  cat- 
tail roots  and  thimble  berries  that  adults  would  be  less 
likely  to  bother  with.  I assume  that  in  the  diet  of  all,  even 
small  amounts  of  certain  vegetable  foods  may  have  been 
very  important  to  health.  I was  surprised  then  to  note, 
in  Murdock’s  Ethnographic  Atlas , estimates  of  20  per  cent 
dependence  on  gathering  for  the  Nootka  and  30  per  cent 
for  the  Kwakiutl  (cf.  Lee,  chap.  4,  this  volume).  As  Lee 
notes,  the  Atlas  defines  “gathering”  as  the  “gathering  of 
wild  plants  and  small  land  fauna,”  while  “shellfishing” 
is  included  with  “fishing”  as  is  sea  mammal  hunting. 
Since  small  land  fauna  were  almost  wholly  ignored  on 
the  Northwest  coast,  the  figures  must  refer  to  vegetable 
foods  alone. 

I am  willing  to  admit  that  my  guess  of  10  per  cent 
dependence  on  vegetable  foods  for  the  central  coast  Salish 
may  be  too  low,  but  the  Kwakiutl  figure  given  in  the 
Atlas  is  surely  too  high.  The  Atlas  gives  estimates  for 
twenty  Northwest  coast  “societies.”  In  the  extreme  south, 
the  Yurok  and  the  Tolowa  proportions  of  gathering/ 
hunting/fishing  are  40/10/50  per  cent  and  40/20/40  per 
cent,  respectively.  This  is  an  area  where  acorns  were 
used  and  naturally  the  proportion  for  gathering  is  greater. 
From  here  northward  the  most  common  figure  for  gather- 
ing is  20  per  cent ; only  the  Puyallup  and  Kwakiutl  have 
30  per  cent,  while  the  Coos,  Quiieute,  Twana,  and 
Klallam  have  10  per  cent.  The  Puyallup  are  a coast 
Salish  group  living  inland  from  Puget  Sound  who  quite 
likely  did  depend  more  on  roots  and  bulbs  than  did  their 
salt-water  neighbors,  though  with  the  complex  exchange 
systems  of  the  area  we  cannot  be  sure.  But  there  seems 
no  reason  at  all  to  give  the  Kwakiutl  a higher  figure 
than  the  Nootka,  Bella  Coola,  and  coast  Salish  of 
northern  Georgia  Strait,  all  of  them  adjacent  to  Kwakiutl 
and  all  given  20  per  cent.  It  is  true  that  George  Hunt 
recorded  44  recipes  for  preparing  vegetable  foods  and 
instructions  for  preserving  some  fifteen  of  them  (Boas, 
1921,  part  1).  But  the  texts  indicate  that  some  of  these 


6l 

ethnographic  accounts  of  just  how  food  was 
obtained.  This  is  not  to  say  there  are  no  good 
works  at  all.  Boas’s  material  on  Kwakiutl  sub- 
sistence activities,  mainly  in  the  form  of  native 
texts  with  translations  (Boas,  1909,  pp.  461- 
516;  1921,  part  1),  gives  the  native  view  of  a 
number  of  food-getting  and  food-storing  tech- 
niques and  a great  many  recipes.  In  these  texts 
we  see  what  was  important  to  the  informant, 
but  do  not  always  find  the  answers  to  questions 
the  ethnographer  would  ask.  From  some,  how- 
ever, we  can  make  inferences  about  quantities 
of  food  taken  and  consumed.  Among  the 
ethnographies  of  the  area,  Drucker’s  (1951) 
on  the  Nootka  (see  also  Drucker,  1965,  chap.  7, 
for  a dramatic  account  of  Nootka  whaling)  and 
Elmendorf’s  (i960)  on  the  Twana  (a  coast 

foods  were  quite  restricted  in  where  they  grew  and  the 
small  quantities  served  to  feast  a village.  Some  too  were 
described  as  emergency  foods  and  evidently  dangerous 
if  eaten  in  quantity.  Most  of  the  roots  were  in  fact  so 
small  that  it  is  hard  to  imagine  gathering  large  amounts 
of  them.  Altogether  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the 
Kwakiutl  would  have  been  very  different  from  the 
Nootka,  of  whom  Drucker  writes: 

There  was  a tremendous  emphasis  on  fats — oils  and 
greases — in  the  dietary  pattern.  Probably  the  fats  made 
up  for  the  virtual  lack  of  starch  and  sugar  forms  of 
carbohydrates.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  potatoes, 
flour,  and  pilot  bread  in  historic  times,  starch  foods 
were  limited  to  the  very  occasional  meals  of  clover  and 
fern  roots,  and  the  few  other  roots.  It  is  obviously 
impossible  to  judge  at  this  late  date,  but  one  receives 
the  impression  from  informants  that  if  the  average 
person  ate  a dozen  or  two  meals  of  roots  in  the  course 
of  a year,  it  was  a lot.  Berries  provided  the  only  sugar 
prior  to  the  introduction  of  molasses,  and  were  highly 
prized.  But  the  berry  season  was  rather  short,  except 
for  that  of  salal  berries,  and  the  few  baskets  of  them 
women  picked  seem  to  have  adorned  rather  than 
materially  augmented  the  diet.  Instead  of  these  things, 
one  hears  constantly  of  fats  and  oils  (1951,  pp.  62-63). 

To  me  this  statement  hardly  implies  the  20  per  cent 
gathering  given  the  Nootka  by  the  Atlas.  On  the  other 
hand,  some  of  the  coast  Salish  groups  probably  did  have 
more  vegetable  food  in  their  diet  than  the  Nootka  and 
Kwakiutl,  yet  two  of  them  (Klallam  and  Twana)  were 
assigned  only  10  per  cent — my  original  guess  for  those 
I am  calling  the  “central”  groups,  which  include  the 
Lummi,  who  are  given  20  per  cent  by  the  Atlas.  I can 
only  conclude  that  the  question  should  be  left  open. 

I agree  with  Lee  that  shellfish  gathering  has  more  in 
common  with  the  gathering  of  plant  foods  than  with 
fishing.  Both  plants  and  shellfish  are  immobile  and  were 
collected  (on  the  Northwest  coast)  mainly  by  women 
using  digging  sticks  and  baskets.  They  differ  only  in 
food  value.  But  sea-mammal  hunting  and  fishing  can 


62  Ecology  and  Economics 

Salish  group)  are  outstanding.  The  only 
specialized  monograph  is  Kroeber  and  Barrett 
(i960)  on  fishing  in  northwestern  California. 
But  for  much  of  the  area  between  the  Klamath 
and  the  Columbia  and  north  of  the  Kwakiutl, 
we  have  only  very  sketchy  accounts. 

The  reason  for  the  deficiency  in  figures  on 
subsistence  is  not  hard  to  find.  The  purely 
aboriginal  way  oTlife  had  been  greatly  altered 
in  most  parts  of  the  Northwest  coast  by  the  end 
of  the  last  century  and  quantitative  data  are, 
as  Kroeber  pointed  out  (1939,  p.  3),  not  ordi- 
narily recoverable  by  the  method  of  ethno- 
graphic reconstruction  we  must  use  in  western 
North  America.  The  reasons  for  the  scant  at- 
tention often  paid  to  subsistence  techniques 
are  also  easy  to  find.  Some  of  the  techniques 
had  disappeared  by  the  beginning  of  this  cen- 
tury or  had  survived  in  forms  altered  by  the 
introduction  of  European  goods.  But,  also,  the 
very  complexity  of  social  forms  and  richness  of 
art  and  ceremony  that  draw  attention  to  the 
area  are  likely  to  draw  attention  away  from 
mere  subsistence.  Thus  when  Mcllwraith 
(1948)  had  the  opportunity  to  play  a part  him- 
self in  the  Bella  Coola  winter  ceremonies,  he 
did  so  and  the  results  form  a good  part  of  his 
two-volume  work  on  that  people.  I find  this 
quite  understandable,  but  still  wish  we  had 
more  on  Bella  Coola  salmon  fishing  than  the 
pluses  and  minuses  in  Drucker’s  (1950)  element 
list.  Another  reason  for  the  neglect  of  sub- 
sistence probably  lies  in  the  assumption  that 
the  habitat  was  so  rich  that  subsistence  simply 
was  not  a problem.  Finally,  an  understanding 
of  just  how  any  given  subsistence  technique 
works  requires  moving  outside  of  culture  and 


present  a similar  case.  The  difference  between  catching 
a 5-pound  salmon  in  a net  and  harpooning  a 20-ton 
whale  seems  clear  enough,  but  what  do  we  do  when  we 
find  the  same  coast  Salish  “sea-food  producer”  (a  native 
category)  harpooning  at  one  time  a 200-pound  seal  and 
at  another  a 1 ,ooo-pound  sturgeon  ? The  difference,  as 
it  was  with  roots  and  shellfish,  is  simply  a matter  of  food 
value,  and  not  a very  great  one  at  that.  The  coast  Salish 
also  harpooned  salmon  and  netted  seals,  ducks,  and  deer. 
If  we  base  our  taxonomy  on  implements  and  activities, 
we  have  to  ignore  the  taxonomy  of  biology,  and  vice 
versa.  If  we  set  up  a category  of  activity  based  on  either 
type  of  implement  (as  “net”)  or  biological  taxon  (as 
“fish”),  we  will  still  be  ignoring  two  other  variables, 
specialization  and  cooperation,  which  may  be  more 
pertinent  to  the  questions  we  are  asking  than  are  types 
of  implements  or  animals. 


seeing  the  technique  as  part  of  an  ecosystem; 
this  is  not  easily  done  if  one  is  unfamiliar  with 
the  natural  history  of  the  area  and  has  only  a 
few  summer  months  to  spend  in  it. 

But  the  situation  is  by  no  means  hopeless.  In 
spite  of  the  fact  that  year  by  year  the  purely 
aboriginal  way  of  life  recedes  into  the  past,’  I 
fully  expect  that  a few  years  hence  we  shall 
know  much  more  about  Northwest  coast  sub- 
sistence than  we  know  today.  I have  several 
reasons  for  this  optimism.  First,  contrary  to 
gloomy  predictions  by  colleagues  that  I’d  find 
all  was  lost,  when  I began  working  with  the 
coast  Salish  I discovered  that  it  was  still  pos- 
sible to  do  ethnography  and  to  get  much  new 
data  on  subsistence.  I am  sure  that  my  ex- 
perience could  still  be  duplicated  in  other 
areas,  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  some 
activities  survive  yet  in  modified  form.  Second, 
data  from  the  related  fields  of  linguistics, 
archeology,  and  ethnohistory  and  from  the 
ethnography  of  other  areas  can  be  increasingly 
used  in  interpreting  the  ethnography  of  one’s 
own  area.  For  example,  some  of  my  informants 
and  the  informants  of  others  have  believed  that 
the  gill  net  is  not  aboriginal  in  the  Salish  area. 
However,  a comparison  of  native  terms  for  the 
gill  net  and  the  record  of  an  earlier  observer 
suggest  that  it  probably  was,  in  fact,  aboriginal. 
I expect  that  further  probing  will  settle  the 
matter.  Third,  the  growing  body  of  biological 
and  climatological  knowledge  can  be  used  to 
interpret  the  ethnographic  data.  For  example, 
the  testimony  of  informants  that  their  ancestors 
fished  by  trolling  in  winter  as  well  as  spring  is 
supported  by  the  work  of  researchers  in  fish- 
eries (for  example,  Rounsefell  and  Kelez,  1938, 
pp.  749-50).  Their  work  indicates  not  only 
that  spring  salmon  are  present  in  winter  but 
that  Indians  did  troll  for  them.  Also,  other  bio- 
logical work  shows  that  herring  spawn  in  this 
area  in  winter  and  early  spring  (Clemens  and 
Wilby,  1946,  pp.  79-80)  and  would  therefore 
be  available  during  times  of  the  month  when 
tides  are  low,  Finally,  meteorological  data 
could  undoubtedly  be  obtained  indicating 
average  number  of  days  during  winter  months 
when  weather  would  permit  trolling  in  each  of 
several  areas. 

When  I express  this  optimism  about  the  pos- 
sibility of  increasing  our  knowledge  of  North- 
west coast  subsistence,  I do  not  mean  to  imply 


Suttles  Coping  with  Abundance : Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast 


that  we  shall  surely  be  able  to  reconstruct  the 
quantitative  data.  But  what  we  surely  can  do 
is  define  more  narrowly  the  requisites  and 
limits  of  each  technique  so  that  we  can  make 
some  estimates  of  the  relative  effectiveness  of 
the  different  techniques  under  similar  condi- 
tions and  the  same  technique  under  different 
conditions. 

Food-Storing  Methods 

The  techniques  for  preserving  food  are  cer- 
tainly as  important  as  those  for  getting  food. 
Thousands  of  salmon  swimming  upstream  in 
September  would  not  make  winter  a time  of 
ceremonial  activity  if  people  lacked  the  means 
of  preserving  them,  nor  would  several  tons  of 
blubber  on  the  beach.  No  doubt  some  people 
would  not  have  survived  some  winters  without 
storage  methods. 

A few  foods  do  not  keep  well  at  all.  Mussels 
and  salmonberries,  for  example,  seem  to  be  too 
soft  and  watery.  But  most  fishes  and  meats, 
some  shellfishes,  and  some  berries  can  be  pre- 
served by  drying,  either  with  or  without  smoke. 
Clams  and  some  meats  were  steamed  and  salal 
berries  were  sometimes  cooked  before  drying. 

Whether  fish  or  meat  can  be  dried  outside  in 
the  sun  or  must  be  smoked  indoors  depends  of 
course  upon  the  season  of  the  catch  and  the 
climate  of  the  area.  In  the  central  coast  Salish 
area,  where  summers  are  relatively  dry  and 
sunny,  summer  catches  of  sockeye  and  hump- 
back salmon,  as  well  as  halibut,  lingcod,  and 
other  fish,  were  generally  dried  on  outdoor 
racks  at  summer  fishing  camps,  where  the 
fishermen  could  live  in  mat  shelters.  Fall  runs 
of  springs,  cohoes,  and  dog  salmon,  however, 
usually  had  to  be  smoked  indoors  because  of 
the  danger  of  rain.  Occasionally  separate  struc- 
tures may  have  been  built  for  smoking  fish,  but 
evidently  the  usual  “smokehouse”  was  the 
ordinary  winter  plank  house  and  in  local 
English  usage  this  is  what  it  is  still  called.  The 
importance  of  this  difference  in  preserving 
methods  for  social  relations  is  easily  seen.  In 
the  drier  season  a nuclear  family,  on  its  own, 
could  store  up  a considerable  amount  of  food 
with  a minimum  of  shelter,  but  in  the  wetter 
season  it  would  be  bound  to  the  plank  house  of 
its  extended  family.  Because  of  its  use  as  a 


63 

smokehouse,  the  plank  house  is  thus  an  impor- 
tant instrument  of  production,  and  the  owner- 
ship or  control  of  a house  at  the  site  of  a fish 
weir  used  in  the  fall  may  have  had  as  important 
social  and  economic  consequences  as  ownership 
or  control  of  the  weir  itself.  In  the  Salish  area, 
weirs  were  in  fact  usually  public  property  but 
houses  were  not. 

In  many  other  parts  of  the  coast,  climatic 
conditions  probably  did  not  permit  as  much 
preserving  of  food  outside  as  in  the  Salish  area. 
During  the  three  months  of  summer,  Victoria 
(in  the  Salish  area)  gets  an  average  of  14  days 
of  rain  (out  of  an  annual  total  of  133)  while 
Port  Hardy  (in  Kwakiutl  country)  gets  38  (out 
of  a total  of  204),  Masset  (Haida)  41  (out  of 
210),  and  Prince  Rupert  (Tsimshian)  46  (out 
of  215).  During  an  average  year  Victoria  gets 
a total  of  2,092  hours  of  sunshine  while  Prince 
Rupert  gets  1,019,  or  roughly  half  (figures 
from  Kendrew  and  Kerr,  1955).  Precipitation 
is  also  greater  on  the  outer  coast  to  the  south 
than  in  the  central  coast  Salish  area.  These 
differences  certainly  have  implications  for  food 
preserving  and  possibly  for  social  relations. 

It  should  be  noted  that  not  all  species  of 
salmon,  perhaps  not  even  all  populations  of 
the  same  species,  keep  equally  well.  My  Salish 
informants  say  that  fatter  fish  last  longer  and 
thus  sockeye  and  dog  salmon  are  their  favor- 
ites. Other  species  may  not  last  through  the 
winter  months. 

Another  very  important  method  of  storage  is 
the  rendering  of  fat  into  oil,  which  can  then  be 
kept  in  such  containers  as  seal  bladders  (in  the 
Salish  area),  kelp  bulbs  (Kwakiutl),  or  wooden 
boxes  (Chinook).  Throughout  most  of  the 
coast,  dried  fish  or  meat  was  eaten  after  being 
dipped  in  oil;  sea-mammal  oil  was  used  from 
the  Salish  and  Nootka  southward,  and  eula- 
chon  oil  was  used  from  the  Kwakiutl  north- 
ward. On  the  Fraser,  where  seal  oil  was  less 
plentiful,  salmon  oil  was  also  used  (Duff,  1952, 
p.  66) . This  constant  use  of  oil  seemed  excessive 
to  Europeans  but  it  may  have  compensated  for 
the  scarcity  of  carbohydrates  (Drucker,  1951, 
p.62;  Rivera  1949,  P- 34;  see  also  note  5 of 
the  present  paper). 

In  the  north,  oil  was  also  used  for  preserving 
some  kinds  of  berries.  From  the  Chinook 
southward,  meat  was  preserved  by  pulverizing 
it  and  mixing  it  with  grease.  Salmon  eggs  were 


64  Ecology  and  Economics 

first  allowed  to  get  “high”  and  to  form  a kind 
of  cheese-like  substance,  and  eulachon  were 
also  allowed  to  decay  before  rendering;  how- 
ever there  was  evidently  no  general  practice  of 
allowing  fish  to  decay.  Storage  pits  are  reported 
for  a few  areas  and  so  are  raised  caches,  but 
probably  throughout  most  of  the  area  pre- 
served food  was  stored  in  boxes,  baskets,  and 
bags  placed  on  racks  inside  the  dwelling  house. 

A number  of  foods,  such  as  dog  salmon,  must 
have  required  far  more  effort  in  the  storing 
than  in  the  taking.  Thus  limits  in  the  exploita- 
tion of  times  of  abundance  may  have  been  set 
less  by  people’s  capacity  to  get  food  than  by 
their  capacity  to  store  it.  How  much  of  a very 
heavy  fall  run  of  dog  salmon  could  be  stored 
must  have  depended  on  the  number  of  hands 
available  for  the  work  of  cutting  and  skewering, 
the  drying-rack  capacity  of  the  houses  at  the 
site,  fuel  for  smoke,  and  finally  the  number  of 
containers  available.  As  Gould  has  stressed, 
preserving  food  was  largely  the  work  of  women 
and  for  this  reason  rights  over  women  and 
bride  prices  were  so  important  in  the  economy 
of  the  Tolowa.  The  role  of  women  in  subsis- 
tence no  doubt  deserves  reappraisal  elsewhere 
on  the  Northwest  coast.  But  it  must  be  re- 
membered that  women  need  not  be  wives;  they 
may  also  be  slaves. 

Values  and  Social  Organization 

Of  course  the  possibilities  offered  by  the  en- 
vironment and  the  techniques  of  food-getting 
and  food-storing  could  be  realized  only 
through  the  work  of  people,  organized  by  their 
social  systems  and  motivated  by  their  value 
system.  To  survive  that  occasional  period  of 
scarcity,  people  had  to  have  not  only  the 
earlier  periods  of  abundance;  the  weirs,  nets, 
etc.,  to  take  the  food  with;  and  the  drying 
racks,  houses,  etc.,  to  preserve  and  store  it  with; 
but  they  also  had  to  have  a reason  for  doing  it 
and  the  ability  to  mobilize  the  labor  for  it. 

Probably  the  knowledge  that  there  is  an 
occasional  period  of  scarcity  is  not  reason 
enough  to  make  most  people  store  up  food  for 
every  winter.  But  the  Northwest  coast  peoples 
had  “better”  reasons.  From  the  Yurok  and 
Tolowa  northward  there  was  the  ultimate  goal 
of  prestige,  into  which  food  was  eventually 


converted.  From  the  Chinook  northward  there 
was  also  the  cultural  definition  of  winter  as  a 
ceremonial  season,  when  people  should  not 
have  to  seek  food.  (This  last  reason  for  storing 
food  was  also  found  through  much  of  the  Pla- 
teau as  well.)  Swan’s  account  of  sorcery  among 
the  Makah  (1870)  suggests  that  some  people 
did  not  expect  random  variation  in  their  en- 
vironment anyway;  they  attributed  bad 
weather  to  human  malice  and  coped  with  it  by 
threatening  the  supposed  sorcerer.  If  people 
stored  food  for  “cultural”  reasons  rather  than 
rational  recognition  of  possible  failure  in  the 
environment,  this  may  explain  why  they  some- 
times did  improvidently  eat  up  all  their  stores 
in  feasting,  as  Poole  reported  for  the  Haida. 
Nevertheless,  the  “cultural”  reasons  may  have 
enabled  larger  populations  to  survive  in  this 
habitat  than  rational  planning  alone  would 
have  done. 

In  social  organization,  there  seems  to  have 
been  a rough  sort  of  south-to-north  gradient  of 
increasing  tightness  of  structure  and  size  of 
social  unit.  Kroeber  found  the  Yurok  so  indi- 
vidualistic that  he  declared: 

Property  and  rights  pertain  to  the  realm  of  the 
individual,  and  the  Yurok  recognizes  no  public 
claim  and  the  existence  of  no  community.  His 
world  is  wholly  an  aggregation  of  individuals. 
There  being  no  society  as  such,  there  is  no  social 
organization.  Clans,  exogamic  groups,  chiefs  or 
governors,  political  units  are  unrepresented  even 
by  traces  in  northwestern  California  (1952,  p.  3). 

Nevertheless,  Kroeber’s  data  suggest  possibly 
three  kinds  of  social  groups  engaging  in  sub- 
sistence activities:  the  members  of  the  house- 
hold, the  joint  owners  of  a fishing  place,  and 
the  large  group  from  several  villages  that  built 
the  Kepel  weir.  This  last  group  is  an  example  of 
what  Anastasio  (1955)  has  called  a “task 
grouping,”  in  which  members  of  social  units 
defined  by  other  criteria  come  together  for  a 
particular  purpose  at  a particular  time  and 
place.  These  task  groupings  are  generally  under 
the  leadership  of  a person  who  has  the  requisite 
technical  and/or  ritual  knowledge.  Treide 
(1965)  has  recently  analyzed  the  function  of 
such  “salmon  chiefs”  as  the  ritual  director  of 
the  Kepel  weir  for  much  of  western  North 
America. 


Suttles  Coping  with  Abundance : Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast  65 


Northward,  on  the  Oregon  coast  the  village 
seems  to  have  consisted  of  an  unnamed  patri- 
lineal kin  group  formed  by  patrilocal  residence 
and  to  have  functioned  as  a unit  under  some 
circumstances  (Barnett,  1937,  elements  1345, 
1400).  Among  the  Chinook  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Columbia,  there  was  a village  chief  (who  may 
have  been  simply  the  head  of  a patrilocal  kin 
group)  who  evidently  exacted  tribute  from  his 
villagers  and  redistributed  it  (Ray,  1938, 
P-  56)- 

The  central  coast  Salish  social  organization 
was  seemingly  looser  than  that  of  the  Chinook. 
Village  exogamy  was  preferred  but  residence 
was  ambilocal  so  neither  the  household  nor  the 
village  formed  any  kind  of  definable  kin  group. 
There  were,  however,  cognatic  kin  groups  per- 
haps best  understood  as  “stem  kindreds,”  that 
is,  the  personal  kindreds  of  successive  genera- 
tions of  “owners”  of  certain  ceremonial  rights 
and  one  or  more  of  the  more  productive  natural 
resources.  One  of  these  men  might  tend  to 
dominate  a village  but  there  was  no  village 
chief  as  such.  The  village  was  recognized  as  a 
unit  when  it  came  to  certain  types  of  sharing 
and  certain  ceremonial  activities,  but  in 
general  the  household  was  autonomous.  Task 
groups  were  directed  by  the  “owners”  of  re- 
sources, such  as  fishing  sites  and  clam  beds;  by 
owners  of  special  gear,  as  the  net  for  a deer 
drive;  or  simply  by  skilled  specialists  in  the 
activity.  Such  subsistence  activities  and  also 
ceremonial  activities  often  brought  together 
people  from  several  villages  over  areas  which 
crossed  dialect  and  even  language  boundaries, 
but  there  were  no  structural  principles  that 
allowed  for  the  definition  of  discrete  social 
units. 

Wakashan  (Nootka  and  Kwakiutl)  social 
structure  seems  to  have  been  similar  to  that  of 
the  Salish  in  that  both  lacked  rules  of  unilocal 
residence  and  unilinear  descent.  The  Nootka 
and  Kwakiutl,  however,  were  much  more 
structured  through  the  principle  of  ranking  of 
titles  in  series.  Within  the  cognatic  kin  group, 
individuals,  at  least  the  more  important  ones, 
held  positions  ranked  in  relation  to  one 
another.  Within  the  village  (or  “tribe”),  kin 
groups  were  so  ranked.  In  a few  areas  “tribes” 
formed  confederacies  through  the  same  prin- 
ciple. Among  the  Wakashans,  as  among  the 
Chinook,  “chiefs”  (in  fact,  kin  group  heads) 


evidently  received  tribute  and  acted  as  re- 
distributers. (For  the  Nootka,  see  Drucker, 
1951,  especially  pp.  220-21,  251-57.) 

The  highest  development  of  formal  organiza- 
tion with  permanent  discrete  social  units  was 
that  found  among  the  northern  peoples.  The 
Tsimshian,  Tlingit,  Haida,  together  with  the 
Haisla  (the  northernmost  Kwakiutl),  had  a 
system  of  matrilineages,  sibs,  and  phratries  or 
moieties.  The  largest  of  these  kin  groups  were 
the  phratries  of  the  Haisla  and  Tsirbshian  and 
the  moieties  of  the  Tlingit  and  Haida.  These 
were  simply  exogamous  units  and  served  to 
classify  every  person  in  the  whole  northern 
area  for  marriageability.  Except  for  the  Tsim- 
shian, the  largest  unit  with  economic  and  poli- 
tical functions  was  the  lineage.  But  the 
Tsimshian  of  the  lower  Skeena  and  Nass  rivers 
went  farther  and  acknowledged  the  chief  of  the 
leading  lineage  of  a village  as  the  village  chief. 
Garfield  believes  that  this  probably  occurred 
early  in  the  eighteenth  century.  Then,  early  in 
the  nineteenth  century,  villages  up  the  Skeena 
established  colonies  near  its  mouth  and  these 
each  remained  under  the  authority  of  the  chief 
of  the  mother  village,  who  in  some  cases  also 
moved  to  the  colony.  “At  this  stage,”  writes 
Garfield,  “tribal  chieftainship  emerged  and  the 
tribal  chief  was  regarded  as  the  active  leader  of 
his  tribesmen  regardless  of  where  they  lived.” 
The  village  chief  and  the  tribal  chief,  like  the 
earlier  lineage  chief,  received  tribute  and  made 
decisions  regarding  moves  to  fishing  sites  and 
other  subsistence  activities  (Garfield,  1951, 
PP-  34-35)- 

The  greater  development  offormal  organiza- 
tion in  the  north  was  probably  accompanied  by 
more  effective  control  of  larger  labor  forces. 
This  difference  in  turn  may  account  for  the  re- 
markably different  views  we  find  on  the  eco- 
nomic importance  of  slavery  on  the  Northwest 
coast. 

Barnett,  writing  primarily  of  the  Kwakiutl 
and  coast  Salish,  suggests  that  slaves  were  “in 
bondage  ...  as  much  a liability  as  an  asset 
and  . . . useful  primarily  as  overt  demonstra- 
tion of  the  ability  to  possess  them”  (1938, 
p.  352).  Drucker  writing  about  the  area  in 
general  says: 

It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  slave  population  of 

the  area,  but  if  was  certainly  never  very  large,  for 


66  Ecology  and  Economics 

slave  mortality  was  high.  Slaves’  economic  utility 
was  negligible.  They  gathered  firewood,  dug 
clams,  and  fished,  but  so  did  their  masters  (1965, 
P-  52). 

Kroeber,  listing  exchange  values  among  the 
Yurok,  expressed  mainly  in  strings  of  dentalia, 
writes : 

A slave  was  rated  at  only  one  or  two  strings. 
Evidently  the  Yurok  did  not  know  how  to  exact 
full  value  from  the  labor  of  their  bondsmen,  not 
because  the  latter  could  not  be  held  to  work,  but 
because  industry  was  too  little  organized  (1925, 
p.  27). 

The  Yurok  did  not  take  slaves  in  war  nor  buy 
them  from  other  peoples;  all  Yurok  slaves  were 
fellow  Yurok  enslaved  by  debt.  The  greatest 
number  of  slaves  held  by  one  man  did  not 
exceed  three  (p.  32). 

On  the  other  hand,  Garfield  (1945,  p.  628; 
1 95 1 , p.  30)  has  strongly  opposed  the  view  that 
slaves  were  kept  merely- for  prestige  value  and 
argued  that  their  contribution  must  have  in- 
creased the  productivity  of  their  owners’  house- 
holds. A potlatching  Tsimshian  chief  was  not 
expected  to  mention  what  his  slaves  contri- 
buted in  labor,  but  if  he  gave  them  away  he 
boasted  of  what  he  had  paid  for  them.  During 
the  nineteenth  century  a slave  was  worth  from 
two  hundred  to  a thousand  dollars.  They  were 
mainly  war  captives  and  their  descendants. 
The  numbers  held  were  much  higher  than 
among  the  southern  tribes. 

Ten  to  twenty  slaves  are  reported  as  belonging 
to  each  of  the  nine  tribal  chiefs  of  Port  Simpson 
in  the  middle  nineteenth  century.  Each  of  approxi- 
mately fifty  Port  Simpson  lineage  heads  is  also 
reported  to  have  owned  from  two  to  as  many  as 
ten  slaves  (Garfield,  1951,  p.  30). 

It  does  seem  that  the  mere  fact  that  slaves 
performed  the  same  task  as  their  masters  does 
not  rule  out  their  being  of  economic  impor- 
tance. If  adding  a wife  or  daughter-in-law  can 
increase  the  productivtiy  of  a Tolowa  house- 
hold and  give  additional  economic  advantage, 
as  Gould  reports,  why  not  adding  a slave  to  a 
Tsimshian  household  ? Kroeber  may  have  been 
correct  regarding  the  organization  of  labor 


among  the  Yurok,  but  can’t  we  expect  more 
from  the  Tsimshian?  Driver  (1961,  pp.  245- 
46,  387-38)  has  pointed  out  that  at  the  south- 
ern end  of  the  Northwest  coast  a master  could 
not  kill  a slave  nor  did  he  have  sexual  rights 
over  a female  slave,  while  in  the  north  he  held 
both  these  rights.  This  too  suggests  the  pos- 
sibility of  greater  control  over  their  labor  in  the 
north. 

Slavery  may  also  be  seen  as  one  of  several 
possible  ways  of  making  the  human  population 
fit  the  resources.  The  most  drastic  of  these  is 
infanticide  in  times  of  scarcity.  As  far  as  we 
know  this  was  not  practiced  on  the  Northwest 
coast.  The  least  drastic  is  fluidity  of  social 
groupings,  allowing  “surplus”  people  at  a place 
with  poor  resources  to  move  in  with  those  at 
more  favored  places.  This  fluidity  was  a promi- 
nent feature  of  the  coast  Salish  social  system. 
With  local  exogamy,  a man’s  four  grand- 
parents were  likely  to  have  been  from  four 
different  villages;  at  each  of  these  he  had  resi- 
dence rights  and  he  also  had  the  option  of  liv- 
ing with  his  wife’s  people.  For  men  of  property 
it  was  certainly  preferable  to  stay  in  one’s 
father’s  village,  but  no  rule  required  it.  The 
Wakashans  also  seem  to  have  been  flexible  in 
the  residence  of  lower-ranking  people.  For  the 
northerners,  the  sib  system  may  have  facilitated 
the  mobility  of  sib-identified  groups.  But  for 
northwestern  California  and  the  Oregon  coast 
we  get  consistent  reports  of  patrilocal  residence 
and  also  of  impoverished  parents  selling  their 
children  into  slavery.  Perhaps  if  residence  rules 
are  rigid,  selling  “surplus”  children  is  the  only 
peaceful  alternative  to  infanticide. 

Finally,  in  looking  at  social  organization  in 
relation  to  subsistence  we  should  note  that  the 
local  group  was  not  simply  a task  force  for  the 
exploitation  of  resources.  In  one  season  it 
could  function  as  a producer  and  distributor 
of  surplus  and  in  another  season  as  an  absorber 
of  surplus  produced  by  other  groups.  Else- 
where (Suttles,  i960,  1962)  in  discussing  the 
central  coast  Salish  socioeconomic  system,  I 
have  pointed  out  how  the  preference  for  local 
exogamy  and  the  exchanges  that  occured  be- 
tween affines  in  different  villages  may  have 
been  adaptive  under  conditions  of  variable 
occurence  of  natural  resources.  A man  with  a 
temporary  abundance  of  any  food  had  three 
choices:  (1)  he  could  share  it  with  his  fellow 


Suttles  Coping  with  Abundance : Subsistence  on  the  Northwest  Coast 


villagers,  if  they  could  consume  it  (which  they 
could  not  if  they  too  had  the  same  abundance) ; 

(2)  he  could  preserve  it,  if  it  was  preservable 
and  he  had  the  labor  force  and  time  before  the 
next  harvest  of  fish,  berries,  etc.,  was  due;  or 

(3)  he  could  take  it  to  his  in-laws  in  another 
village  (where  this  particular  food  might  be 
scarce)  and  receive  in  return  a gift  of  wealth, 
which  he  might  give  later  to  in-laws  bringing 
food  to  him.  If  he  got  more  wealth  than  he 
gave,  he  could  always  potlatch  and  convert  the 
wealth  into  glory,  which  of  course  might  attract 
more  prosperous  in-laws.  Thus,  exchange  be- 
tween affines  made  it  possible  for  a household 
not  to  store  food  and  still  take  advantage  of 
times  of  abundance.6 

Vayda  (1961a)  and  Piddocke  (1965)  have 
suggested  that  the  Kwakiutl  potlatch  system 
may  also  be  seen  as  an  adaptation  to  a fluc- 
tuating environment  rather  than  the  “absurdly 
wasteful”  epiphenomenon  it  had  sometimes 
been  labeled.  From  Piddocke’s  review  of  the 
data,  it  appears  that  the  Kwakiutl  converted 
food  into  wealth  by  selling  it  to  those  in  need 
(somewhat  as  Gould  reports  the  Tolowa  hav- 
ing done)  and  then  (unlike  the  Tolowa)  con- 
verted the  wealth  into  prestige  through 
competitive  potlatching.  Piddocke  argues  that 
the  entry  of  new  wealth  into  the  system  and  the 
reduction  of  the  population  through  disease 
increased  the  size  and  frequency  of  potlatches 
to  the  “fantastic”  level  of  the  classic  descrip- 
tions. 

Weinberg  (1965)  has  criticized  and  ex- 
panded on  Vayda’s  suggestion  and  worked  out 
a model  of  Kwakiutl  culture  as  a self-regulating 
adaptive  system  in  which  the  stability  of  cul- 
ture is  dependent  on  fluctuation  in  the  environ- 
ment within  certain  limits.  When,  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  the  limits  were  exceeded  in 
the  direction  of  surplus,  the  spectacular  growth 
of  the  potlatch  that  followed  was  essentially  an 

6.  Exchange  between  affines  may  also  have  served 
simply  to  keep  more  people  busy.  Woodburn  states 
(Chapter  I7d,this  volume)  that  a skilled  Hadza  hunter 
could  not  control  the  number  of  his  hangers-on.  I suspect 
that  a good  provider  among  the  coast  Salish  had  the 
same  problem,  an  increased  number  of  less  productive 
resident  kin.  But  this  was  offset  by  his  obligation  to  take 
food  to  his  in-laws,  who  were  honor-bound  to  repay  him 
with  wealth,  which  he  did  not  have  to  redistribute.  A 
man’s  affines  in  other  villages  may  have  been  his  covert 
allies  against  potential  spongers  at  home. 


67 

effort  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  culture 
(cf.  “Romer’s  Rule”  of  Hockett  and  Ascher, 

1964)- 

It  has  been  implicit  in  the  previous  discussion 
of  the  coast  Salish  that  items  of  “wealth” 
(blankets,  canoes,  hide  shirts,  etc.)  did  not 
constitute  all-purpose  money.  As  in  several 
other  parts  of  the  world,  there  were  restrictions 
on  the  occasions  when  wealth  items  could 
properly  change  hands.  These  restrictions  seem 
to  have  been  less  severe  among  the  Tolowa, 
but  still  present  in  that  only  exchanges  that  re- 
lated to  marriage  and  litigation  were  publi- 
cized, while  those  that  were  purely  commercial 
were  not,  hence  the  appearance  of  a separate 
“prestige  economy.”  Among  the  Kwakiutl, 
too,  giving  was  certainly  more  honorable  than 
selling.  The  areas  where  commercial  transac- 
tions were  most  open  and  honorable  seem  to 
have  been  the  north  and,  most  especially,  the 
lower  Columbia.  But  even  here  commerce  was 
not  wholly  free  for  it  is  reported  that  chiefs 
(lineage  heads?)  held  monopolies  over  trade 
in  their  territories.  It  seems  possible  that  such 
monopolies  may  have  had  their  origins  in  ex- 
changes between  affines  in  areas  of  different 
resources.  In  both  cases  the  most  important 
trade  was  between  the  coast  and  interior — the 
Tlingit  with  the  Athapaskan  hinterland  and 
the  Chinookans  with  the  Nateau  Sahaptins. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  question,  at  pres- 
ent unanswerable,  is:  Why  didn't  a market 
economy  develop  and  spread  out  from  these 
areas  ? Or  were  these  commercial  developments 
so  recent  that  there  was  no  time  left  for  further 
growth?  This  may  be,  yet  archeological  evi- 
dence suggests  that  some  form  of  trade  goes 
back  to  the  early  occupation  of  the  area. 

Conclusions 

I am  afraid  I have  raised  more  questions  about 
the  Northwest  coast  than  I have  been  able  to 
answer.  If  I can  offer  any  conclusion  it  can  only 
be  this:  The  Northwest  coast  material  suggests 
that  where  people  are  faced  with  great  seasonal 
and  local  variations  in  the  amount  of  food 
offered  by  their  habitat,  their  success  in  exploit- 
ing the  abundance  depends  on  more  than 
technology  alone.  They  must  also  have:  (1) 
the  organization  of  labor  for  getting  and 


68  Ecology  and  Economics 

storing  food  (marital  rights?  kin  obligations? 
property  rights?  monopoly  of  technical  and/or 
ritual  knowledge?);  (2)  some  means  of  re- 
distributing population  on  the  habitat  (wide 
kin  ties  and  fluidity  of  residence?  slavery?) 
and/or  of  redistributing  the  bounty  of  the  habi- 
tat among  the  population  (barter  in  food? 
exchange  of  food  for  durable  goods  ? markets  ?) ; 
and  (3)  some  motivating  value  (prestige?).  It 
seems  tome  that  these  factors  together  with  an 
adequate  technology,  are  necessary  conditions 
for  coping  with  abundance,  regardless  of 
whether  it  appears  in  the  form  of  fish,  sea 
mammals,  land  game,  or  even  vegetable  food. 

From  the  data  presented  on  the  “simpler” 
hunters  by  other  members  of  the  symposium,  it 
appears  that  those  hunters  often  are  capable  of 
organizing  drives  and  other  activities  that 
would  take  quantities  of  animals  if  available. 
They  also  seem  to  have,  and  necessarily  so,  a 


fluidity  of  organization  that  permits  redistri- 
bution of  population  and  at  least  rudimentary 
trade.  Perhaps  the  greatest  point  of  contrast  is 
that  the  simpler  hunters  lacked  the  characteris- 
tic Northwest  coast  feature  of  motivation  to 
achieve  and  maintain  superior  status  through 
production  of  surplus.  For  this  reason  it  seems 
to  me  that  the  “hunting  ideology”  or  nomadic 
style  (Lee  and  DeVore,  Chapter  1,  this  volume) 
may  turn  out  to  be  well  worth  the  attention  it 
seems  to  have  attracted.  Finally,  I would  ask, 
when  we  find  archeological  evidence  of  unex- 
pected cultural  complexity  and  population 
density,  is  it  altogether  hopeless  to  seek  ethno- 
graphic parallels  from  the  Northwest  coast  ? 
This  is  not  to  say  that  I believe  the  Upper 
Paleolithic  Europeans  held  slaves  and  gave  pot- 
latches.  But  I expect  that  some  day  we  will  be 
in  a position  to  say  whether  they  possessed  the 
functional  equivalents. 


7- 


Subsistence  and  Ecology 

of  Northern  Food  Gatherers  with  Special  Reference 
to  the  Ainu 

HITOSHI  WATANABE 


Introduction 

The  symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter  devoted  a 
great  deal  of  attention  to  problems  of  analyzing 
group  structure  and  subsistence  activities.  The 
relations  between  these  two  areas  and  their 
spatial  correlates,  however,  did  not  receive  the 
attention  they  deserve.  The  purpose  of  this 
paper  is  to  consider  these  two  questions  in  more 
detail.  First,  I discuss  the  arrangement  of  settle- 
ments with  reference  to  resources  and  attempt 
to  clarify  the  concepts  of  nomadism  and  seden- 
tarism.  Second,  I discuss  the  allocation  of  sub- 
sistence activities  by  sex  and  age,  in  order  to 
reconsider  the  issue  of  division  of  labor  and 
how  it  evolved.  For  documentation  I draw 
upon  field  research  among  the  Ainu  (Wata- 
nabe,  1964a,  1964b,  1964c)  and  other  ethno- 
graphic data  on  Arctic  and  subarctic  food 
gatherers. 

The  Problem  of  “Semi-Nomadism” 

Residential  Shifts  and  the  Food- quest 

Gjessing  (1944)  introduced  the  concept  of  a 
“semi-nomadism”  in  contemporary  Arctic  and 


subarctic  food  gatherers  in  his  study  of  house 
and  settlement  types  of  the  Circumpolar  Stone 
Age.  The  so-called  semi-nomadism  of  those 
peoples,  however,  shows  such  remarkable 
variation  that  it  is  difficult  to  apply  the  con- 
cept. A simple  typology  of  three  terms  (no- 
madic, semi-nomadic,  and  sedentary)  is  not 
sufficient  to  describe  the  wide  variety  observed 
in  patterns  of  residential  shift.  To  make  a sys- 
tematic investigation  of  semi-nomadism,  I have 
attempted  a classification  of  the  residential  shift 
patterns  of  northern  food  gatherers  (Table  1). 

This  classification  shows  that  the  residential 
shift  patterns  of  those  peoples  termed  semi- 
nomadic  actually  vary  across  the  spectrum.  A 
feature  common  to  all  such  people  is  settled  life 
in  winter.  Thus,  the  variation  in  residential 
shift  pattern  is,  in  a large  measure,  brought 
about  by  the  differences  in  the  residence 
arrangements  in  summer.  Such  peoples  as  the 
Ainu  (Watanabe,  1964a,  1964b,  1964c),  the 
Koryak  (Jochelson,  1905-08),  and  the  Bering 
Strait  Eskimo  (Nelson,  1899),  attained  the 
highest  stability  of  residence  in  the  sense  that 
they  occupied  one  and  the  same  permanent 
dwelling  all  the  year  round.  Of  these  peoples 
only  the  Ainu  subsisted  largely  on  land  mam- 
mals, the  rest  chiefly  subsisting  on  sea  mammals 

69 


70  Ecology  and  Economics 


Table  1 

A Tentative  Classification  of  Residential  Shift  Patterns 

Pattern  of  Residence 

Ethnographi 

ic  Example's 

Winter 

Summer 

Northern 

Southern 

1 

1 

Wandering 

Wandering 

? 

Semang 

a 

Settled ; 

Wandering 

Caribou  Eskimo 

Bushmen 

Temporary 

Copper  Eskimo 

Siriono 

Shelter 

Ilia 

Settled ; 

Wandering 

Nunatarmiut 

? 

Quasi-permanent 

Shelter 

1 1 1 b 

Settled ; 

Wandering 

Kuchin 

Forest- Andamanese 

Permanent 

Yukaghir 

Shelter 

(Upper  Kolyma) 

IVa 

Settled; 

Periodical  Expedi- 

Tareumiut 

? 

Permanent 

tions  to  Definite 

Klallam 

‘Jo 

Shelter 

Sites; 

c/5 

Temporary 

to 

Shelter 

IVb 

V 

t- 

Settled; 

Periodical  Expedi- 

Nootka 

p 

c 

Permanent 

tions  to  Definite 

Shelter 

Sites; 

Permanent 

Shelter 

V 

Settled ; 

Settled; 

Eskimo 

Vedda 

Permanent 

Permanent 

(Bering  Strait) 

Shelter 

Shelter 

Ingalik 

(Among  northern  peoples  often 

Koryak 

in  the  same  locality) 

Gilyak 

VI 

Settled ; 

Periodical  Expedi- 

Eskimo 

Paiute 

Permanent 

tions  to  Definite 

(Bering  Strait) 

(Owens  Valley) 

Shelter 

Sites; 

Koryak 

Quasi-permanent 

Ainu 

Shelter 

(Hokkaido) 

> 

(Tentative  Classification) 

and/or  fish.  Other  northern  gatherers  living 
largely  on  land  mammals  are  all  nomadic 
wanderers  in  the  summer.  The  period  of  the 
longest  inhabitation  at  the  same  place,  how- 
ever, varies  greatly  in  different  groups.  The 
Nunatarmiut  (Larsen  and  Rainey,  1948),  for 
instance,  stay  in  winter  villages  for  as  long  as 
nine  months,  although  younger  group  mem- 


bers wander  about  and  live  in  temporary 
camps  even  in  winter.  O11  the  other  hand,  the 
Copper  Eskimo  (Jenness,  1922)  lives  in  the 
winter  settlements  for  only  about  three  months. 

The  classification  presented  here  may  also 
be  applied  to  southern  food  gatherers,  provided 
the  division  of  the  seasons  is  replaced  by  dry 
and  rainy  seasons.  It  is  almost  certain  that 


Watanabe  Subsistence  and  Ecology  of  Northern  Food  Gatherers  71 


m 


THE  RIVER  AND  ITS  TRIBUTARIES 
FISHING 


Z RIVER  BANKS 

PLANT  COLLECTION,  CULTIVATION  OF 
PLANTS 


V ''V 
/ ✓ / / 


3 RIVER  TERRACES 

DEER  HUNTING  (AUTUMN)  PLANT  COLLECTION 
HABITATION 


4 HILLSIDES  ALONG  THE  RIVER  COURSE 

DEER  HUNTINGlEARLY  WINTER  AND  SPRING) 
BEAR  HUNTING  (OCCASIONAL  OR  SUBSIDIARY) 


5 


RIVERHEAD  MOUNTAIN  REGION 

BEAR  HUNTING  (PERIODICAL  AND  INTENSIVE 
COLLECTION  OF  URMUS  BARK 


) 


Figure  i.  Representation  of  Ecological  Zones  of  a River  Valley  as  the 
Territory  of  an  Ainu  Group. 


among  food  gatherers  outside  the  Arctic  and 
subarctic  regions  there  also  exists  a wide 
variation  of  the  residential-shift  pattern.  One 
extreme  of  the  variation  is  represented  by  the 
Semang  who  move  about  throughout  the  year 
(Forde,  1934,  1954)  and  the  other  by  the 
Owens  Valley  Paiute  who  inhabited  perma- 
nent villages  more  or  less  year  round  (Steward, 
1938).  Significant  here  is  the  fact  that  both 
extremes  represent  groups  subsisting  on  plant 
collecting.  Other  southern  hunter-gatherers 
show  considerable  variation  in  the  residential 
pattern.  The  case  of  the  Vedda  (Seligmann 
and  Seligmann,  1911)  demonstrates  that  the 
residential  shifting  can  be  restricted  to  only 
two  sites  occupied  alternately.  On  the  other 


hand,  the  Forest  Andamanese  (Radcliffe- 
Brown,  1933)  are  a good  example  of  southern 
hunter-gatherers  with  a permanent  settlement 
as  a base  for  seasonal  hunting  and  collecting. 

In  southern  regions,  however,  it  is  difficult  to 
find  any  hunter-gatherers  who  maintain  as 
permanent  a year-round  residence  as  do  the 
Ainu.  Is  the  high  residential  stability  of  the 
Ainu  a result  of  their  subsistence  on  salmon? 
The  economic  importance  of  this  fish  for  the 
Ainu  is  certainly  great.  But  the  deer  also  had 
an  important  place  in  their  diet,  and  there  is 
evidence  to  suggest  that  in  some  areas  more 
than  half  of  their  animal  food  supply  was  de- 
rived from  deer  alone.  In  a settlement  on  the 
upper  Tokapchi,  for  instance,  the  annual  catch 


72  Ecology  and  Economics 

of  the  deer  per  family  was  not  less  than  300 
while  the  annual  store  of  fish  per  family  con- 
sisted of  500-600  dog  salmon  and  600-800 
cherry  salmon.  The  figures  are  not  likely  to  be 
exaggerated.  The  deer  was  hunted  not  only  for 
the  meat  but  also  for  the  skin  which  was  an 
important  item  of  trade.  The  meat  was  con- 
sumed both  by  the  Ainu  themselves  and  by 
their  hunting  dogs.  They  also  habitually  pre- 
pared extra  stores  of  food  as  insurance  against 
the  year  when  resources  failed.  The  Tushipet 
valley  in  Tokapchi  had  no  runs  of  dog  salmon 
and  the  Ainu  there  lived  chiefly  on  deer.  In 
spite  of  their  dependence  on  deer,  even  the 
Tushipet  Ainu  maintained  perennially  in- 
habited settlements. 

Residential  Stability, 

Ecological  g^ones,  and  Habitat 

One  of  the  fundamental  factors  relevant  to  the 
high  stability  of  residence  among  the  Ainu  may 
have  been  the  distribution  of  the  ecological 
zones  within  narrow  river  valleys  they  in- 
habited (Fig.  1).  Ecological  zones  refer  to  the 
zones  of  exploitative  activities  classified  in 
terms  of  physiography  and  biota.  The  sub- 
sistence activities  of  the  Ainu  were  conducted 
in  the  following  ecological  zones,  each  of  which 
yielded  specific  resources  in  specific  seasons : 

(1)  The  river:  cherry  salmon  fishing  (summer, 
in  the  main  stream  and  some  tributaries) ; dog 
salmon  fishing  (autumn,  in  the  main  stream) ; 

(2)  The  river  banks:  collecting  of  wild  plants 
(spring  to  autumn);  (3)  The  river  terraces: 
deer  hunting  (autumn);  plant  collecting 
(spring  to  autumn) ; human  habitation  (all 
year);  (4)  The  hillsides  along  the  river  course: 
deer  hunting  (early  winter,  at  or  near  the 
animals’  winter  quarters);  (5)  The  mountain 
region  around  the  source  of  the  river:  bear 
hunting,  specialized  (spring  and  autumn) ; col- 
lection of  elm  bark  for  clothing  (usually 
spring). 

Zones  1-3  were  exploited  from  a single 
center,  namely  the  permanent  settlement 
which  is  usually  situated  on  the  edge  of  the 
river  terrace.  The  outermost  zones  4 and  5 
were  hunting  areas,  each  exploited  from  a 
different  hunting  hut.  Some  Ainu,  especially 
those  living  downstream,  did  not  engage  in  bear 
hunts  and  consequently  had  no  hunting  hut  in 


zone  5.  Such  a settlement  group  as  Tonnika  of 
the  Azuma  valley  exploited  the  zone  4 directly 
from  their  permanent  settlement  since  the 
Azuma  valley  is  so  narrow  that  zone  4 was 
within  easy  walking  distance  of  the  base  camp. 

Seasonal  migrations  to  the  hunting  huts  were 
generally  undertaken  by  the  male  members  of 
each  household  in  the  settlement.  When  men 
moved,  their  wives  and  children  were  left  be- 
hind; the  remaining  family  members  had 
various  tasks,  of  which  the  collection  of  edible 
plants  in  zones  2 and  3 was  the  most  impor- 
tant. The  periodic  migration  occurred  each 
spring  and  autumn;  men  moved  to  the  same 
hut  to  stay  for  about  one  month  during  each 
hunting  season.  Thus  men  shifted  residence 
usually  twice  every  year;  however,  the  total 
period  of  their  stay  away  from  their  homes  was 
only  about  two  or  three  months  per  year.  The 
permanent  houses  in  the  settlement  were  occu- 
pied by  the  entire  family  for  nine  to  ten  months 
of  the  year  and  by  housewives  and  their 
children  nearly  all  the  year. 

From  1884  onward,  the  Japanese  govern- 
ment encouraged  the  Ainu  to  take  up  agricul- 
ture. Each  Ainu  household  was  granted  a plot 
of  land,  was  given  agricultural  implements  and 
seeds,  and  received  technical  instructions  from 
official  Japanese  specialists.  Consequently,  they 
were  suddenly  transformed  from  a gathering 
life  to  a farming  life.  Even  before  this  change, 
however,  the  coastal  Ainu  and  part  of  the  in- 
terior Ainu,  probably  under  Japanese  in- 
fluence, had  farmed  by  shifting  cultivation, 
although  on  a very  small  scale.  The  old  tech- 
niques were  simpler  and  the  farm  work  was 
usually  performed  by  women.  There  are  con- 
crete data  (Watanabe,  1964a)  showing  that 
those  groups  who  practiced  farming  gathered 
wild  roots  with  less  frequency  and  in  smaller 
quantity  than  those  who  did  not.  But  there  is 
no  evidence  that  the  introduction  of  the  primi- 
tive (pre-1884)  agriculture  significantly  in- 
creased the  stability  of  residence  among  them. 

A similar  distribution  pattern  of  ecological 
zones  and  a high  stability  of  residence  are 
found  among  the  Northern  Paiute  in  Owens 
Valley  (Steward,  1938).  In  both  Flokkaido  and 
Owens  Valley,  it  is  the  presence  of  narrow 
valleys  that  permitted  the  maintenance  of 
year-round  residence. 

The  residential  shift  pattern  depends  upon 


Watanabe  Subsistence  and  Ecology  of  Northern  Food  Gatherers 


ecology,  that  is,  the  relationship  between  habi- 
tat and  subsistence  technology.  The  ecological 
study  of  the  Basin-Plateau  tribes  by  Julian 
Steward  (1938)  clearly  indicates  that  even 
within  the  same  cultural  group  the  residential 
shift  pattern  may  vary  a considerable  degree 
according  to  the  variation  of  habitat.  Among 
the  Upper  Tanana  of  the  Yukon,  the  pattern  of 
residential  moves  varied  even  from  band  to 
band  (McKennan,  1959). 

If  the  variation  of  habitat  can  affect  the 
residential  shift  pattern,  there  may  be  a possi- 
bility that  some  form  of  the  residential  shift 
pattern  can  be  defined  for  populations  of  early 
man.  Karl  Butzer  (1964)  pointed  out  the 
existence  in  southwestern  France  of  Mouster- 
ian  and  late  Paleolithic  caves  which  he  inter- 
preted as  perennially  inhabited  dwellings,  and 
suggested  that  the  Neanderthalers  of  the  less 
severe  forest-tundra  environments  were  able 
to  maintain  settlements  based  on  permanently 
available  animal  resources.  This  is  an  indica- 
tion that  under  certain  favorable  conditions 
even  early  man  may  have  been  able  to  inhabit 
certain  sites  with  little  shifting  of  residence.  In 
this  connection  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  moun- 
tain valleys  of  inland  Alaska  described  by 
William  Irving  (1953)  provide  a set  of  biotic 
zones  compactly  arranged  within  small  terri- 
tories which  suggest  suitable  conditions  for  Arc- 
tic hunters  to  maintain  stable  residence. 
Modern  Alaskan  groups  have  no  year-round 
residence,  but  at  least  some  of  the  Nunatar- 
miut  maintained  their  quasi-permanent  villages 
for  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  perhaps  nine 
months  (Larsen  and  Rainey,  1948). 

Variability  of  the  Residential 
Stability  at  the  Level  of  the  Individual 

An  aspect  of  the  complexity  of  the  northern 
semi-nomadism  is  the  fact  that  a residential 
shift  does  not  always  mean  movement  of  the 
entire  social  group,  since  settlements  are  not 
always  completely  deserted.  In  other  words, 
there  is  the  variability  in  residential  stability  at 
the  level  of  the  individual  as  well  as  of  the 
family  and  band. 

An  analysis  of  ethnographic  reports  would 
reveal  that  among  many  of  the  northern 
hunters  there  are  some  non-moving,  sedentary 
individuals  or  families  who  occupy  the  same 


73 

dwelling  all  year,  while  there  are  others  who 
shift  their  residence.  Such  variation  of  resi- 
dential stability  is  correlated  with  differentia- 
tion in  subsistence  activity  at  the  level  of  the 
individual  or  the  family,  which  will  be  men- 
tioned below.  Peoples  who  maintain  some 
sedentary  members  at  the  base  camp  are  those 
who  make,  instead  of  nomadic  wanderings, 
seasonal  expeditions  from  the  permanent 
dwelling  to  other  sites.  Such  definite  evidence  is 
found  among  the  Ainu  (Watanabe,  1964a),  the 
Northwest  coast  Indians  (Drucker,  1951; 
Gunther,  1927)  the  Ingalik  (Osgood,  1958), 
the  Tareumiut  (R.  Spencer,  1959),  and  the 
Bering  Strait  Eskimo  (Nelson,  1899).  Indirect 
evidence  suggests  that  perhaps  other  peoples, 
such  as  the  Koryak  (Jochelson,  1905-08),  be- 
long to  this  category.  Groups  without  such 
sedentary  members  are  those  who  make  no- 
madic wanderings  whether  they  have  a 
permanent  winter  dwelling  or  not.  The  ex- 
amples are  the  Copper  Eskimo  (Jenness,  1922) 
and  the  Upper  Kolyma  Yukaghir  (Jochelson, 

1926)- 

As  far  as  evidence  is  available,  the  sedentary 
persons  appear  to  be  the  less  able-bodied,  the 
aged,  women,  and  children.  These  persons 
among  the  Ainu  and  Ingalik  (Osgood,  1940) 
were  engaged  in  collecting  and/or  fishing  in 
areas  near  their  settlement  while  others  were 
away  from  the  settlements  hunting  and/or 
fishing  at  distant  localities.  But  among  the  Ainu 
and  Tareumiut  (R.  Spencer,  1959,  1965),  at 
least,  even  some  able-bodied  men  would  re- 
main perennially  in  their  permanent  settle- 
ments owing  to  the  circumstances  of  gathering. 
Among  the  Ainu,  some  male  members  of  a 
nuclear  family  seasonally  moved  to  a mountain 
hut  for  bear  hunting,  while  others  remained  in 
their  settlement,  engaged  on  fishing  and  deer 
hunting.  Among  the  North  Alaskan  coastal 
Eskimo  (R.  Spencer,  1959,  1965),  some  nuclear 
families  moved  to  the  summer  camps  for  fish- 
ing and  hunting  land  mammals,  while  others 
remained  in  the  winter  villages  hunting  sea 
mammals.  Even  among  nomadic  wanderers 
such  as  the  Nunamiut  (R.  Spencer,  1959)  and 
the  Chipewyan  (Birkett-Smith,  1930),  there  is 
a considerable  degree  of  occupational  differ- 
entiation at  the  level  of  the  individual  or  the 
family.  R.  F.  Spencer  (1965)  pointed  out  the 
Tareumiut’s  freedom  to  choose  the  summer 


74  Ecology  and  Economics 

work  best  suited  to  their  needs  or  their  skills. 
To  what  extent  such  differentiation  and  the 
freedom  of  choice  in  subsistence  activity  exists 
among  other  food  gatherers  is  a problem 
worthy  of  further  exploration. 

Among  some  northern  food  gatherers,  as 
previously  mentioned,  there  is  a tendency  for 
some  individuals  or  families  to  remain  in  the 
same  permanent  dwelling  all  the  year  although 
the  proportion  of  the  moving  population  to  the 
sedentary  one  is  yet  to  be  investigated.  The 
non-moving  members  are  less  able-bodied  per- 
sons or  the  aged,  women,  and  children. 
Among  nomadic  food  gatherers  abandonment 
of  the  aged  as  well  as  the  sick  is  a common 
practice  (Simmons,  1945;  Watanabe,  1966). 
Possibilities  for  the  aged,  the  sick,  and  the  in- 
firm to  survive  or  live  longer  may  be  greater 
among  sedentary  food  gatherers  than  among 
nomadic  ones.  This  implies  that  opportunities 
for  such  persons  to  remain  perennially  settled 
may  have  had  adaptive  significance  (Wata- 
nabe, 1966).  One  of  the  possible  effects  is 
greater  life  span,  which,  in  turn,  would  in- 
fluence the  age  composition  of  the  population. 
Another  possible  effect  is  in  selective  pressure. 
Sedentary  life  may  give  greater  possibilities  of 
survival  to  the  sick  and  infirm  or  pregnant. 
These  effects  may  vary  and  change  according 
to  the  variation  and  change  in  residential 
stability  as  well  as  other  ecological  conditions 
inside  and  outside  the  dwelling.  S.  L.  Wash- 
burn and  I.  DeVore  (1961a)  pointed  out  the 
importance  of  the  home  base  for  populations 
of  early  man,  and  its  evolutionary  implication 
concerning  hominisation.  During  the  Pleisto- 
cene, variation  in  the  residential  shift  pattern 
must  have  had  some  effects  on  the  stability  of 
the  home  base  in  both  its  earlier  and  later 
stages  and  consequently  must  have  influenced 
human  evolution  (Watanabe,  1966). 

Hunting  as  an  Occupation  of  Males 

The  development  of  meat-eating  and  the  es- 
tablishment of  a hunting  way  of  life  are  re- 
garded as  important  ecological  factors  in 
hominid  evolution  (Washburn  and  Avis,  1958; 
Washburn  and  Lancaster,  Chapter  32,  this 
volume;  Zuckermann,  1933).  A related  prob- 
lem is  the  consistent  allocation  of  hunting  to 


males  and  collecting  to  females.  Sex  differences 
in  psychology  and  physiology  alone  would  not 
be  sufficient  to  explain  this  division  of  labor. 
The  problem  will  be  further  pursued  by  mak- 
ing reference  to  data  from  modern  hunter- 
gatherers. 

Individualistic  or 

Noncommunal  Hunting  of  Larger  M ammals 

Hunting  of  small  animals  by  women  is  not  a 
rare  phenomenon.  Among  such  peoples  as  the 
Shoshoni  (Steward,  1938)  and  the  aboriginal 
Australians  (Berndt  and  Berndt,  1964;  Spencer 
and  Gillin,  1927),  it  is,  in  fact,  a woman’s 
occupation. 

In  case  of  relatively  large  mammals  there  is 
information  from  various  peoples  that  women 
take  part  in  communal  hunts  (Turnbull, 
1965a,  1965b).  Occasional  cases  are  not  un- 
known of  women  hunting  large  mammals 
alone.  Some  Copper  Eskimo  women  (Jenness, 
1922)  hunted  seal  and  the  caribou  occa- 
sionally ; Ainu  women  and  children  (Watanabe, 
1964a)  sometimes  hunted  deer  with  sticks, 
ropes,  and/or  dogs  when  they  had  opportuni- 
ties. But  there  is  no  society  in  which  individual- 
istic or  noncommunal  hunting  of  larger  mam- 
mals is  the  socially  recognized  regular 
occupation  of  women.  It  is  this  individualistic 
hunting  of  larger  mammals  that  is  invariably 
the  task  of  males.  Communal  hunts,  however, 
do  not  always  exclude  females. 

Among  modern  hunter-gatherers,  exclusion 
of  females  from  the  individualistic  hunting  of 
larger  mammals  seems  to  be  closely  related  to 
the  making  and  using  of  hunting  weapons, and 
associated  economic  and/or  religious  ideas. 
Women  have  no  weapons  of  their  own  which 
are  specially  made  to  hunt  animals.  If  they 
want  to  hunt  they  must  do  so  without  weapons 
or  otherwise  with  some  provisional  weapons 
such  as  sticks.  Rarely  do  they  use  specially  made 
hunting  weapons  such  as  harpoons  or  spears, 
although  these  might  be  borrowed  temporarily 
from  males.  Under  these  restrictions  women’s 
hunting  activities  are  confined  to  small  animal 
hunts,  communal  hunts  in  which  they  take 
part  in  driving,  and,  very  rarely,  individual 
hunts  of  larger  mammals. 

Ethnographic  data  suggest  that  perhaps  the 
development  of  hunting  weapons  and  ideas 


Watanabe  Subsistence  and  Ecology  of  Northern  Food  Gatherers  75 


male  fema*-e 

Figure  2.  Seasonal  Changes  in  the  Activity  Fields  of  Male  and  Female  Ainu. 


associated  with  them  is  one  of  the  factors  rele- 
vant to  the  tendency  towards  the  exclusion  of 
females  from  hunting. 

Differentiation  of  the 
Activity  Field  according  to  Sex 

Another  possible  factor  pertinent  to  the  alloca- 
tion of  hunting  to  males  is  the  differentiation 
of  the  activity  field  according  to  sex.  The  ac- 
tivity field  means  the  area  of  land  covered  by 
each  individual  in  his  subsistence  activities. 

Among  the  Ainu  (Watanabe,  1964a,  1964b), 
the  male’s  activity  field  is  clearly  and  markedly 
differentiated  from  the  female’s  (Fig.  2).  The 
male’s  field  extends  far  beyond  that  of  the  fe- 
male and  the  two  fields  have  little  overlap. 
The  extension  of  the  male’s  field  is  the  result 
of  hunting,  while  most  of  the  female’s  activity 
field  is  the  area  near  the  base  camp  covered  in 
her  collecting  activities. 


The  degree  of  the  differentiation  of  the  two 
fields  seems  to  vary  from  people  to  people. 
Among  the  Semang  (F’orde,  1934,  1954),  who 
are  mostly  vegetarian  and  whose  hunting  is 
sporadic  and  confined  to  smaller  game,  the 
differentiation  seems  to  be  much  less  marked 
than  among  the  Ainu.  But  among  the  Kuchin 
(Osgood,  1936a),  men  are  active  full-time 
hunters  of  large  game,  and  the  activity  field  of 
males  markedly  deviates  from  that  of  females 
even  in  the  way  in  which  camps  are  moved.  A 
Kuchin  woman  trudges  slowly  on  with  her 
burden,  following  the  direct  line  from  one 
camp  to  another,  while  her  husband  carrying 
only  a gun  circles  widely  through  the  hills  and 
covers  many  more  miles  in  transit. 

It  seems  to  be  certain  that  the  differentiation 
of  the  activity  field  according  to  sex  is  a 
universal  phenomenon  among  modern  food 
gatherers.  It  may  be  one  of  the  ecolo- 
gical characteristics  of  man.  Owing  to  this 


Ecology  and  Economics 


76 


Table  2 Allocation  of  Hunting  Tasks  by  Age 


Tribe  Age  Division 


Ainu 

Younger  men: 

Older  men: 

(Watanabe,  1964a) 

Bear  hunting  in  areas 

Deer  hunting  in  areas 

distant  from  the 

nearer  to  the 

settlement 

settlement 

Younger  men: 

Older  men: 

Spearing  fish 

Peep-hut  fishing 

(cold  season) 

(cold  season) 

Chukchee 

Son: 

Elderly  father: 

(Bogoras,  1904-09) 

Long  expeditions  for 

Shorter  trips  for 

sea  mammals 

sea  mammals 

— Communal  reindeer  hunting — 

Younger  men: 

Older  men  (with 

Stabbing  the  animals 

women  and  children) : 

in  canoe 

Interception  of  the 
wounded  animals 
carried  away  by  the 

stream 

Tikerarmiut 

Able-bodied  men: 

Old  people  (and 

(Larsen  and  Rainey, 

Winter  seal  hunting 

children : 

1948) 

Fishing  crabs  through 
ice  holes 

Nunatarmiut 

Younger  people: 

Aged  (and  some 

(Larsen  and  Rainey, 

Winter  hunting  in  the 

women  and  children) : 

>948) 

mountains 

Left  in  semi-permanent 
villages  in  winter 

Iglulimiut 

Younger  men : 

Older  men: 

(Damas,  1963) 

Roaming  inland  after 

Hunting  sea  mammals 

caribou  (August- 
September) 

(August-September) 

Dogrib  and  Yellowknife 

— Located  by  the  Hunt  Leader — 

(R.  Spencer,  1965) 

Younger  men: 

Older  people  (and 

Far  afield  for 

women  and  children) : 

trapping 

Berry  picking  or  at 
a fish  camp 

Paiute 

— Communal  Deer  Hunts — 

(Steward,  1938) 

Young  men: 

Older  men: 

Driving  of  deer 

Hiding  by  game  trails 
to  shoot  deer 

— Communal  Buffalo  Hunts — 

Young  men: 

Old  Men: 

Sent  out  to  find 

Butchering  of  the 

the  game 

kill 

Watanabe  Subsistence  and  Ecology  of  Northern  Food  Gatherers 


differentiation  the  structure  of  man’s  home 
range  differs  from  that  of  nonhuman  primates. 

Plants  stand  still,  but  animals  move;  the 
distribution  of  specific  plants  does  not  always 
coincide  with  that  of  specific  animal  species. 
Owing  to  the  ecology  of  biotic  species  it  is 
usually  difficult  to  get  edible  plants  and  large 
mammals  in  the  same  place  at  the  same  time. 
Consequently  hunting  ground  for  the  animals 
and  collecting  fields  for  the  plant  food  are  not 
identical.  Synchronous  exploitations  of  both 
resources  by  one  and  the  same  group  neces- 
sitates the  splitting  of  the  unit. 

Data  from  the  Ainu  and  other  food  gatherers 
imply  the  possibility  of  an  interpretation  of  the 
process  of  the  allocation  of  hunting  to  males  in 
the  following  way : ( i ) long  and  active  pursuit 
of  larger  mammals  brought  about  the  differ- 
entiation of  the  activity  field  into  the  collecting 
and  the  hunting  fields;  (2)  the  necessity  of 
synchronous  exploitation  of  these  spatially 
separated  fields  forced  "the  group  to  split;  (3) 
this  splitting  and  the  selection  for  hunting 
ability  on  the  basis  of  physical  and  psycho- 
logical differences  resulted  in  the  allocation  of 
hunting  to  males  and  collecting  to  females. 

It  may  be  assumed  that  the  selection  for 
hunting  skills  began  when  early  man  took  up 
long  and  active  pursuits  of  larger  mammals. 
The  Yukaghir  (Jochelson,  1926)  and  Ingalik 
(Osgood,  1958),  for  instance,  clearly  exhibit 
the  importance  for  larger  mammal  hunters  of 
physical  and  psychological  capacities  such  as 
the  ability  of  continuous  running  and  endur- 
ance. The  sexual  division  of  labor  might  be 
reversible  in  work  other  than  individualistic 


77 

hunting  of  larger  mammals,  but  in  this  kind  of 
hunting  no  reverse  case  is  found  at  all. 

Tendency  toward  Age  Division  of  Labor 

One  of  the  most  neglected  phases  of  the  eco- 
nomic life  of  food  gatherers  is  age  division  of 
labor.  Careful  examination  of  ethnographic 
data  reveals  that  among  food  gatherers  there 
is  a tendency  for  the  more  strenuous  work  to  be 
allocated  to  younger  members  of  the  popula- 
tion study,  although  this  division  of  labor  is  not 
so  striking  as  the  sexual  division  of  labor.  How- 
ever, it  is  known  that  in  hunting,  at  least,  some 
northern  food  gatherers  practice  division  of 
labor  between  the  younger  and  the  older.  It  is 
sometimes  division  of  tasks  within  an  occupa- 
tion and  sometimes  a division  of  whole  occupa- 
tions. Although  it  is  uncertain  to  what  extent 
the  division  is  rigid  and  fixed,  it  is  apparent 
that  the  division  of  labor  crosscuts  the  sexual 
division  of  labor  to  form  an  important  part  of 
the  organization  of  food  getting.  In  Table  2, 
the  allocation  of  hunting  tasks  by  age  is  cited 
for  seven  northern  groups. 

The  age  division  of  labor  shows  a tendency 
towards  the  differentiation  of  the  activity  field 
in  which  the  younger  men  exploit  more  distant 
fields  and  the  older  men  fields  nearer  to  base 
camp. 

Age  division  of  labor  must  have  some  re- 
lationship to  the  age  composition  of  the  society 
concerned.  In  view  of  the  shorter  life  span  of 
early  man  (Vallois,  1962),  here  is  an  interesting 
problem  in  the  history  of  that  division  of 
labor. 


The  Netsilik  Eskimos: 
Adaptive  Processes 


ASEN  BALIKGI 


The  Netsilik  Eskimos  inhabit  a vast  area  over 
300  miles  in  length  and  over  100  miles  in  depth 
north  and  west  of  Hudson  Bay.1  The  region  is 
barren,  covered  with  innumerable  rocky  hills, 
lakes,  sea  inlets,  and  vast  stretches  of  flat 
tundra.  The  climate  is  arctic,  characterized  by 
extremely  cold  winters  and  short  cool  summers. 
The  local  tundra  bears  no  trees  and  its  vege- 
tation consists  of  creeping  shrubs,  tufted  grass- 
like plants,  lichens,  and  mosses.  When  travel- 
ing through  this  cold  desert  in  1923,  Knud 
Rasmussen  counted  259  Eskimos  of  whom  150 
were  males  and  only  1 09  females.  They  lived  a 
nearly  traditional  life,  having  had  only  mini- 
mal contact  with  Europeans  up  to  that  time 
and  having  obtained  guns  only  a few  years 
before.  The  Netsilingmiut  hunted  the  caribou, 
the  musk-ox,  and  the  seal,  they  fished  the 
salmon  trout  and,  with  the  exception  of  some 
berry  picking  in  August,  did  no  gathering. 
The  question  asked  in  this  paper  is:  What 
were  the  adaptive  processes  and  survival 
strategies  utilized  by  the  Netsilik  Eskimos  in 
this  extremely  harsh  environment?  It  is  as- 
sumed here  that  adaptation  can  be  analyzed 

1.  The  data  summarized  here  refer  to  the  second  and 
third  decade  of  our  century.  They  were  collected  in  the 
field  in  i960  from  elderly  informants  as  part  of  a general 
reconstruction  of  Netsilik  traditional  culture  (Balikci, 
1964). 

78 


at  three  distinct  levels:  (1)  the  technological, 
(2)  thesocioecological,  and  (3)thedemographic. 

Technological  Adaptation 

Netsilik  technology  consists  of  four  major  com- 
plexes, on  the  basis  of  the  raw  materials 
utilized:  the  snow-ice  complex  (snowhouses, 
ice-houses,  ice-caches,  etc.),  the  skin  complex 
(clothing,  kayaks,  sledges,  tents,  etc.),  the  bone 
complex  (tools  and  weapons),  and  the  stone 
complex  (cooking  utensils).  Netsilik  technology 
is  thus  adaptive  in  two  ways:  first,  through  the 
ingenious  manufacture  of  a large  number  of 
specialized  artifacts  from  a small  number  of 
locally  available  raw  materials;  and  second,  in 
reference  to  the  adaptive  features  of  the 
finished  artifacts  related  to  specific  environ- 
mental conditions.  It  is  primarily  these  forms 
of  easily  visible  technological  adaptation  that 
drew  the  admiration  of  ethnographers. 

Ecological  Adaptation 

Order  and  Predictability  in  the  Annual  Round 

Among  the  four  socioecological  processes  of 
adaptation  to  be  considered  is  the  predictability 


Balikci  The  Netsilik  Eskimos : Adaptive  Processes 


Arviligjuarmiut,  a Netsilik  Subgroup,  for  the  Year  1919. 


Camp  No. 

Season 

Subsistence  Activity 

Camp  1 'I 
Camp  2 J 

Midwinter 

Seal  hunting  at  the  breathing  holes 

Camp  3 

Spring 

Seal  hunting  at  the  large  breathing  holes 

Camp  4 

Midsummer 

Fishing  at  the  stone  weir 

Camp  5 

Early  fall 

Caribou  hunting  inland 

Camp  6 

Late  fall 

Fishing  through  the  thin  river  ice 

80  Ecology  and  Economics 

and  order  implicit  in  the  annual  migration 
circuit  (see  map,  Fig.  i).  In  winter,  after 
the  caribou  had  left  the  country,  the  Netsiling- 
muit  had  to  rely  almost  exclusively  on  the  seal 
for  survival.  Since  the  seal  keeps  open  a large 
number  of  breathing  holes,  it  was  advantageous 
to  have  numerous  hunters,  with  harpoons  in 
hand,  to  control  an  equal  number  of  holes. 
Large  hunting  parties  had  maximal  chances 
for  a speedy  catch.  Hence  the  rationale  for 
extended  igloo  communities  consisting  of  over 
sixty  people  and  comprising  several  distantly 
related  extended  families.  Winter  was  the 
season  of  intense  social  life,  spcctacularshaman- 
izing  and  other  ceremonial  activity  (Fig.  i, 
Camps  i and  2). 

Early  in  June  when  the  seals  came  lying  on 
the  ice,  the  large  winter  camp  broke  up  into 
smaller  social  units  having  usually  an  extended 
family  as  a core.  Tents  were  set  up  on  the  shore 
and  group  sealing  continued  at  the  large 
breathing  holes  (Camp  3).  In  July,  the  res- 
tricted groups  moved  inland,  fishing  with  the 
fishing  harpoon  and  occasionally  hunting  cari- 
bou with  the  bow  and  arrow.  After  the  first 
week  of  August,  the  stone  weirs  were  built 
across  rivers  and  the  salmon  trout  running  up- 
stream were  caught  in  large  amounts  with 
leisters  (Camp  4).  At  the  end  of  August  began 
the  vitally  important  caribou  hunts  from 
kayaks  at  the  caribou  crossing  place  (Camp 
5).  This  was  a collaborative  activity  involving 
a division  of  tasks  between  beaters  and  spearers. 
Early  in  October  the  restricted  groups  moved 
camp  to  some  larger  river  and  fished  salmon 
trout  with  leisters  through  the  thin  river  ice 
(Camp  6).  As  winter  came  on  the  larger  groups 
re-formed  for  sealing  through  the  breathing 
holes  (Camps  1 and  2). 

During  spring,  summer,  and  autumn  the 
restricted  social  units  were  isolated  in  the  tun- 
dra and  social  life  was  markedly  less  intense. 
The  Netsilik  migration  route  thus  reveals  a 
basic  winter-marine  and  summer-inland  dicho- 
tomy involving  a dual  pattern  in  social 
morphology  in  harmony  with  the  classic  analy- 
sis of  Marcel  Mauss  on  the  seasonal  variations 
of  Eskimo  society  (Mauss,  1906).  There  is  thus 
a clear  correlation  between  the  movements  of 
society  and  the  known  distribution  of  game, 
permitting  the  exercise  of  prediction  (Balikci, 
1964).  It  clearly  indicates  an  adaptive  pattern, 


the  migrating  groups  taking  advantage  of  par- 
ticular game  concentrations  through  the 
different  seasons. 

Alternatives  and 

Substitutions  in  Subsistence  Strategy 

The  endless  search  for  alternatives,  the  prac- 
tices of  substitution  and  ad  hoc  inventiveness 
constitute  another  class  of  adaptive  strategies. 
Each  seasonal  hunt  knows  of  some  alternative. 
If  the  fall  caribou  hunts  with  spears  from 
kayaks  failed,  the  bow  and  arrow  was  used.  In 
winter,  musk-ox  hunting  could  be  substituted 
for  sealing.  In  summer,  if  fishing  with  the  leister 
was  unrewarding,  the  fishing  harpoon  or  the 
sleeping  hooks  were  employed.  There  always 
seems  to  have  been  a way  out  of  a difficult 
situation.  The  alert  hunter  had  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  any  changes  in  game  availability 
and  specific  local  conditions  such  as  wind 
direction  and  topography  and  adapt  his  hunt- 
ing strategy  with  ingenuity.  In  hunting,  no 
conditions  are  static  and  quick  ad  hoc  decisions 
were  necessary. 

Flexibility  of  Group  Structure 

Constantly  changing  opportunities  and  pres- 
sures favored  flexibility  in  residence  and  de- 
termined temporary  fission  of  co-residential 
groups.  At  all  seasons  the  co-residential  groups 
functioned  as  production  and  distribution 
units,  yet  in  various  stress  situations  the  com- 
munity would  split,  separating  extended  fami- 
lies. Or  a nuclear  family  would  go  on  extensive 
fishing  or  trading  trips.  Or  two  brothers  would 
hunt  temporarily  in  different  areas  and  thus 
maximize  game  returns,  the  possible  failure  of 
the  first  being  compensated  for  by  the  success 
of  the  second.  Later  the  original  group  would 
reassemble.  Clearly  such  fissive  practices  are 
adaptive  in  character  and  appear  to  be  com- 
mon to  many  of  the  hunting  peoples  discussed 
at  the  symposium. 

Sharing 

Delayed  consumption  involving  elaborate 
caching  techniques  and  various  sharing  pat- 


Balikci  The  Netsilik  Eskimos : Adaptive  Processes  81 


terns  equalized  food  distribution  both  through 
time  and  within  the  community.  Sharing 
patterns  ranged  from  informal  gift  giving  and 
occasional  or  regular  commensality  to  rigidly 
structured,  community-wide  division  of  seal 
meat.  Such  rigorous  sharing  was  based  upon  a 
system  of  named  dyadic  partnerships  involving 
all  hunters  in  camp  and  cutting  across  kinship 
alignments.  Thus  an  unlucky  hunter  was  al- 
ways certain  by  right  to  obtain  a portion  of  the 
daily  catch  secured  by  any  one  of  his  partners 
(Van  de  Velde,  1956).  Clearly  such  a system  is 
adaptive.  Camp  fellows  share  together  or 
starve  together. 

The  adaptive  processes  described  here  can 
be  best  understood  in  relation  to  the  almost 
continuous  ecological  pressure  to  which  the 
Netsilik  were  subjected.  Traveling  and  moving 
camps  was  a very  arduous  task.  Lack  of  dog 
feed  severely  limited  the  keeping  of  dogs  to  only 
one  or  two  per  family.  The  heavy  sledges  had 
to  be  pulled  or  pushed  by  both  men  and 
women.  Only  very  small  children  were  allowed 
to  sit  on  the  sledge.  Old  people  had  to  drag 
themselves  behind,  and  were  often  left  behind 
to  sleep  out  on  the  ice  if  they  had  not  caught 
up  with  the  others.  Seal  hunting  involved  a 
motionless  watch  on  the  flat  ice  under  intense 
cold  maintained  for  many  hours.  In  order  to 
build  the  stone  weir,  the  stones  had  to  be 
carried  in  the  ice-cold  water  for  several  days. 
Beating  the  fast-running  caribou  over  great 
distances  in  the  tundra  was  an  exhausting  task. 
Stalking  the  caribou  with  the  bow  and  arrow 
also  involved  endless  pursuits  across  the  tundra, 
the  hunters  lying  on  the  wet  grass  and  trying 
to  approach  the  game  while  hiding  behind 
tufts  of  moss.  The  nomadism  of  the  hunting  life 
in  this  extremely  rigorous  climate  imposed  a 
constant  strain  on  the  humans.  Hunting  was  a 
never-ceasing  pursuit,  the  game  had  to  be 
brought  to  camp  at  all  cost,  and  the  hunter  had 
to  stay  out  until  a successful  kill : “The  man 
that  is  wise  never  lolls  about  idle  when  the 
weather  is  good;  he  can  never  know  when 
bad  days  may  eat  up  his  meat  caches  and  drive 
him  and  his  family  into  starvation”  (Rasmus- 
sen, 1931,  p.  134).  At  a camp  of  Kuggup- 
pamiut,  Rasmussen  observed  that  for  the  whole 
of  the  winter  twelve  hunters  caught  about  150 
seals:  “this  may  well  be  said  to  have  been 
dearly  bought  food.” 


Demographic  Adaptation 

Such  continuous  pressures  and  hardships  neces- 
sitated internal,  sociodemographic  controls. 
The  most  rigorous  was  female  infanticide 
(Balikci,  MS.).  On  King  William  Island,  Ras- 
mussen counted  38  girls  killed  out  of  96  births, 
in  a genealogical  sample  of  eighteen  marriages. 
He  concluded:  “Despite  the  high  birth  rate  the 
tribe  is  moving  towards  extinction  if  girl  child- 
ren are  to  be  constantly  suppressed”  (1931, 
p.  1 4 1 ) . The  Netsilingmuit  considered  life  as 
harsh  and  short,  and  girls  were  thought  to  be 
less  productive  than  boys  who  were  the  future 
hunters.  An  informant  said  to  Rasmussen, 
“Parents  often  consider  that  they  cannot  afford 
to  waste  several  years  nursing  a girl.  We  get 
old  so  quickly  and  so  we  must  be  quick  and  get 
a son”  (1931,  p.  140).  In  the  same  context,  a 
Pelly  Bay  Eskimo  pointed  to  his  dog  team  and 
added,  “Bitches  simply  don’t  pull  as  hard  as 
the  dogs  do.”  This  high  rate  of  female  infanti- 
cide generated  the  sex  imbalance  noted  by 
Rasmussen  and  resulted  in  great  difficulties  in 
finding  a wife.  So  anxious  were  the  parents 
to  secure  future  wives  for  their  little  boys 
that  they  betrothed  them  to  any  one  of  their 
female  cousins  (Balikci,  1963).  Cousins,  both 
cross  and  parallel,  were  preferred  because 
the  parents  of  the  promised  couple  were  closely 
related,  trusted  each  other,  and  kept  their 
word;  their  children  thus  had  maximal  chan- 
ces to  become  husband  and  wife.  Furthermore, 
suicide  in  crisis  situations,  invalidicide  and 
senilicide  were  additional  responses  to  harsh 
pressures  (Balikci,  i960).  We  may  consider 
these  forms  of  demographic  controls  as  adap- 
tive, in  the  sense  that  unproductive  members 
of  society  were  eliminated,  the  size  of  the  family 
adjusted  to  the  capacity  of  the  provider,  and 
the  survival  chances  of  future  hunters  were 
maximized. 


Discussion 

It  is  assumed  here  that  the  combination  of 
adaptive  processes  and  controls  functioned 
successfully  under  conditions  of  optimal  eco- 
logical pressure.  Of  course  we  admit  with  Ras- 
mussen that:  “Everything  is  naturally  focussed 
entirely  and  absolutely  upon  the  requirements 


82  Ecology  and  Economics 

that  the  increasing  search  for  the  daily  meat 
necessitates”  (1931,  p.  142).  Yet  with  peak 
ecological  pressure,  disaster  occurred.  For  the 
two  years  preceeding  his  journey  of  1923,  Ras- 
mussen counted  25  deaths  due  to  starvation, 
equivalent  to  10  per  cent  of  the  tribal  popula- 
tion. Order  and  predictability,  together  with 
flexibility,  certainly  existed,  yet  they  did  not 
leave  the  Netsilik  with  much  leisure  and  evi- 
dently failed  on  some  occasions  to  assure  his 
survival. 

A brief  comment  may  be  necessary  concern- 
ing the  notions  of  harsh  environment  and 
ecological  adaptation  and  pressure.  Harsh 
environment  refers  more  closely  to  objective 
geographic  realities.  In  the  case  of  the  Netsilik 
area,  it  includes  primarily  a long  winter 
characterized  by  intense  cold,  lack  of  timber, 
and  shifting  and  occasionally  unpredictable 
game  concentrations.  The  term  ecological 
adaptation  is  the  effect  of  the  most  striking  fea- 
tures of  environment  on  human  life,  as  evi- 
denced in  subsistence  techniques,  economic 
organization,  and  settlement  patterns.  It  is 
obviously  a dynamic  process  and  relative  to  the 
technical  equipment  of  a society.  Ecological 
pressure  is  but  one  phase  of  the  genera!  adap- 
tive process  and  implies  diminution  of  food 
availability,  and  increased  difficulty  in  secur- 
ing a livelihood.  Such  periods  of  hardship  were 
consciously  recognized  by  the  Netsilik  who  re- 
acted accordingly  by  trying  alternative  strate- 
gies. The  work/leisure  time  ratio  may  be 
considered  as  one  objective  criterion  for  mea- 
suring the  degree  of  ecological  pressure.  Food 
availability  over  prolonged  periods  expressed 
in  quantitative  terms  may  be  another  such 
measure.  Depending  on  a multiplicity  of 
factors,  pressure  phases  may  be  of  greatly  vary- 
ing irregular  occurrence,  or  they  may  be  cycli- 
cal and  seasonal.  They  may  attain  a critical 
level  which  results  in  starvation  for  productive 
members  of  society. 


Now  within  the  vast  Eskimo  area  there  are 
great  regional  differences  in  the  processes  of 
ecological  adaptation.  For  instance,  both 
northern  Alaska  and  the  Netsilik  country  may 
be  considered  to  have  harsh  environments,  yet 
the  abundance  of  larger  sea  mammals  in 
Alaska  has  allowed  a much  denser  population 
to  develop  relatively  sedentary  patterns. 
Greater  food  availability  seems  to  have  re- 
duced prolonged  ecological  pressure  among  the 
Alaskan  Eskimos  and  made  possible  the  growth 
of  complex  ceremonialism.  In  the  Netsilik  area, 
on  the  other  hand,  prolonged  pressure  phases 
appear  to  have  been  much  more  frequent  and 
severe.  The  relatively  low  seal  availability  and 
the  erratic  character  of  caribou  migrations 
seem  to  have  been  mainly  responsible  for  this 
state  of  affairs.  The  Caribou  Eskimos  dwelling 
inland  illustrate  another  case  of  precarious 
ecological  adaptation  with  frequent  pressure 
phases. 

The  Bushmen  (Lee,  Chapter  4,  this  volume) 
seem  to  enjoy  a regular  availability  of  resources 
allowing  for  considerable  leisure  time.  The 
Bushmen  are  primarily  collectors  of  plant 
foods  and  only  secondarily  hunters.  In  their 
region,  pressure  phases  seem  infrequent. 
Clearly  the  Netsilik  Eskimos  stand  in  sharp 
constrast  to  the  Bushmen.  The  Netsilik  case 
can  be  considered  as  an  extreme  example  of 
human  adaptation  to  a harsh  environment.  In 
our  opinion,  both  Bushmen  and  Netsilik 
constitute  extreme  cases,  and  neither  can  be 
considered  as  typical  as  far  as  ecological 
adaptation  of  hunters-gatherers  is  concerned. 
It  is  rather  obvious  that  in  each  geographic 
zone  inhabited  by  hunters-gatherers,  different 
adaptive  forms  are  going  to  be  found  with 
different  qualities  of  pressures.  A regional  ty- 
pology should  have  a greater  heuristic  value 
than  blunt  assumptions  about  global  lack  or 
presence  of  ecological  pressure  in  hunting  and 
gathering  societies. 


9 


Discussions,  Part  II 


9a.  The  Central 
Eskimo:  A Marginal  Case? 

Speakers:  Balikci,  Damas,  Eggan,  Helm,  Wash- 
burn. 

Damas:  I would  like  to  question  one  or  two 
points  in  Dr.  Balikci’s  paper.  I think  that  he  is 
right  in  indicating  that  winter  communities 
comprise  several  extended  families.  But  from 
the  group  charts  that  I have  been  able  to  re- 
construct for  the  early  1920’s,  the  families  were 
connected  by  primary  ties.  And  in  an  earlier 
period,  the  Netsilik  winter  groups  were  con- 
siderably larger,  piobably  averaging  100- 150, 
implying  a more  substantial  subsistence  base. 
Between  1900-20,  about  150  people  moved 
down  to  trade  at  Repulse  Bay,  and  the  Chester- 
field area,  which  accounts  for  the  smaller  band 
size  of  the  later  period. 

Dr.  Balikci’s  treatment  of  alternative  means 
of  food  procural  seems  to  imply  that  they  may 
all  be  equally  fortunate  choices.  I suggest  in- 
stead that  in  the  winter,  hunting  through  the 
breathing  hole  was  the  only  practical  way  for 
the  group  to  survive.  At  times,  the  Netsilik 
made  long  trips  for  polar  bear,  and  in  extreme 
cases  they  jigged  for  tomcod.  But  these  were  not 
reliable  means  of  survival. 

I think  that  the  quotation  from  Rasmussen 
in  Balikci’s  paper  regarding  the  harried  exis- 
tence of  the  Kuggup  is  not  altogether  typical  of 


the  Central  Eskimo.  There  seems  to  be  quite  a 
variation  within  the  Netsilik  area  in  the  game 
potential.  The  Thom  Bay,  Bellot  Strait,  and 
Queen  Maud  Gulf  areas  were  probably  better 
endowed  than  the  area  in  which  Rasmussen 
found  the  Kuggup. 

Finally,  apropos  of  the  deaths  from  starva- 
tion mentioned  in  Dr.  Balikci’s  paper,  it  might 
be  interesting  to  note  that  starvation  was 
usually  related  to  bad  weather.  In  the  particu- 
lar case  cited,  there  was  a late  freezing  of  the 
sea  accompanied  by  storms,  which  made  the 
ice  rough  and  unsuitable  for  normal  winter 
hunting. 

Balikci  : Concerning  the  first  point  in  refer- 
ence to  the  primary  ties  linking  extended 
families,  I am  in  agreement  with  Dr.  Damas. 
This  is  to  be  expected  for  small,  bilaterally 
organized  communities.  My  aim  was  to  empha- 
size that  on  many  occasions  extended  families 
among  the  eastern  Netsilik  behaved  as  discrete 
social  units,  independent  of  the  close  ties  be- 
tween particular  members  of  different  extended 
families.  As  for  the  restricted  size  of  winter 
settlements  in  the  early  1920’s,  emigration  may 
probably  account  for  this,  at  least  partially. 
Yet  a figure  as  high  as  150  individuals  seems 
difficult  to  accept  in  view  of  the  limited  sub- 
sistence base.  More  probably,  large  groups 
occupying  an  area  were  divided  into  two  or 
three  camps  located  close  by  to  allow  visiting. 
It  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  there  was 


83 


84  Ecology  and  Economics 

considerable  flexibility  in  the  size  and  duration 
of  winter  settlements.  As  for  my  data,  I took 
the  four  or  five  years  before  Rasmussen’s 
journey  of  1923  as  baseline. 

I did  not  imply  that  alternative  means  of 
food  procural  were  as  good  as  the  main  sub- 
sistence technique  for  a particular  season  and 
site.  My  point  is  that  substitutes  were  available 
as  a temporary  device  to  avoid  disaster.  The 
effectiveness  of  the  alternatives  depended  on 
particular  local  conditions.  The  very  use  of  the 
terms  of  alternatives  and  substitutes  implies 
their  quality  as  “second-best”  choices. 

In  reference  to  regional  variation  in  game 
availability  within  the  Netsilik  area,  I agree 
with  Dr.  Damas’  comment.  Of  course  there 
was  considerable  variation : Pelly  Bay  was  good 
for  fish,  Thom  Bay  was  good  for  seals,  the  area 
behind  Tksiaktorvik  was  good  for  caribou, 
and  the  western  Netsilik  could  obtain  a good 
deal  of  tomcod.  But  I wished  to  produce  a 
global  scale  for  the  Netsilik  and  did  not  have 
place  for  regional  variations. 

Helm  : I refer  to  a paper  published  some 
years  ago  in  which  Bartholomew  and  Birdsell 
(:953)  said,  in  effect,  that  it  does  not  matter 
how  well  you  eat  during  eleven  months  of  the 
year  if  you  have  no  food  during  the  twelfth 
month.  I think  that  this  holds  true  in  terms  of 
generations.  If  a group  maintains  or  increases 
its  population  for,  say,  three  generations,  but 
there  is  then  a severe  population  loss,  there  is 
apt  to  be  a cutback  in  incipient  development 
and  even  the  continuity  of  cultural  forms.  Has 
this  happened  among  the  Central  Eskimo? 

Balikci:  It  is  difficult  to  answer  this  for  very 
long  time  depths.  However,  with  the  exception 
of  occasional  cases  of  people  getting  lost  in 
traveling  or  getting  caught  in  bad  weather — 
as  in  the  example  from  Rasmussen — wide- 
spread starvation  of  a magnitude  required  to 
induce  culture  loss,  is  a very  rare  phenomenon. 

Washburn:  Dr.  Balikci  has  shown  that  there 
can  be  a real  struggle  for  existence  in  some 
extremely  marginal  areas,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  others  have  spoken  about  hunters  that 
were  not  living  marginally  and  who  did  not 
harvest  all  the  food  they  might.  I would  like 
to  suggest  that  these  are  not  necessarily  contra- 
dictory notions.  If  we  look  at  what  happened 
to  the  idea  of  the  struggle  for  existence  in 
genetics,  we  find  that  it  started  in  the  con- 


ception of  an  all-out  tooth-and-claw  struggle 
and  then  changed  to  a consideration  of  what 
works  in  the  long  run. 

I think  this  is  the  kind  of  shift  that  we  need 
to  make  when  we  look  at  human  economies.  It 
is  not  so  important  to  worry  whether  people 
are  going  to  die  tomorrow  or  whether  they  are 
eating  to  their  maximum  capacity.  What  we 
want  to  know  and  understand  is  the  kind  of 
system  that  works  and  keeps  on  working.  For  a 
quantitative  example,  Bourliere  (1963)  esti- 
mated the  amount  of  meat  on  the  hoof  both  in 
the  Congo  forest  and  in  the  savanna  on  the 
edge  of  the  forest.  The  amount  in  the  forest 
proved  to  be  only  about  5 per  cent  as  great  as 
that  in  the  savanna.  So  objectively  speaking, 
there  is  a great  deal  more  to  be  harvested  in  the 
savanna. 

I would  like  to  shift  for  a moment  to  Paul  K. 
Anderson’s  study  (a  seminar  given  to  the  Zo- 
ology Department,  Berkeley,  in  1965)  of  mice  in 
Canada  living  near  great  grain  depots.  Now, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  mice,  these  depots 
represent  an  infinite  supply  of  food,  so  there  is 
no  reason  why  the  mouse  population  should 
not  soar  to  infinity.  But  this  is  not  what  hap- 
pens at  all.  The  mice  build  up  a group  of 
about  twenty,  then  subadltlt  and  young  adult 
males  migrate  away  from  the  food  supply.  Here 
is  a built-in  genetic  system  devised,  so  to  speak, 
to  keep  these  animals  moving  out.  They  have 
not  been  evolved  to  eat  tons  and  tons  of  grain 
and  are,  therefore,  completely  unable  to  adjust 
to  the  presence  of  it.  I think  that  the  lesson  of 
this  is  that  an  economy  may  be  completely 
adaptive  when  those  involved  are  eating  only 
20-30  per  cent  of  the  available  food.  It  is  not 
adaptive  to  eat  the  complete  food  supply, 
since — aside  from  the  troubles  brought  on  even 
by  a minor  variation  in  supply — anything  like 
a major  seasonal  variation  will  break  down  the 
system.  So  if  through  warfare  the  Pygmy 
group  occupies  twice  the  area  that  it  needs  for 
its  normal  food  supply,  this  may  actually  be  an 
adaptive  situation  in  the  long  run.  We  have, 
then,  to  abandon  the  notion  of  an  immediate 
struggle — even  though  it  shows  up  among 
groups  like  the  Eskimo — in  favor  of  a far  more 
subtle  approach,  in  which  we  try  to  determine 
just  what  percentages  of  the  food  supply  would 
be  used  in  a good  adaptation  by  a particular 
group. 


Eggan:  I want  to  follow  up  one  of  Wash- 
burn’s points  on  adaptation  versus  flexibility. 
There  is  a series  of  norms  or  sanctions  with 
regard  to  the  sharing  of  food.  It  seems  to  me 
that  they  often  differ  with  the  kind  of  food — 
meat,  fish,  or  vegetable — with  the  size  of  the 
animals  involved,  and  with  the  latitude  of  the 
location.  I remember  looking  at  the  Siberian- 
central  Asian  data,  and  in  that  area  food- 
sharing increases  to  the  north  and  decreases  to 
the  south.  I wonder  whether  these  patterns  of 
sharing,  if  we  worked  them  out,  might  not  give 
us  something  relevant  to  the  problem  of  adap- 
tation, even  an  index  to  it. 

9b.  Notes  on  the 
Original  Affluent  Society 

Speaker : Sahlins 

Sahlins:  I should  like  to  pick  a point  that  is 
embedded  in  Colin  Turnbull’s  discussion,  im- 
plied in  Suttles’,  elaborated  in  Lee’s,  and  given 
ultimate  explanation  I think  in  Washburn’s 
comments,  particularly  his  suggestion  that  a 
20-30  per  cent  use  of  productive  capacity  may 
prove  quite  adaptive  over  the  long  run.  What 
I want  to  talk  about  is,  as  it  were,  the  inner 
meaning  of  running  below  capacity,  the  conse- 
quences for  the  quality  of  hunting-gathering 
economical  life. 

If  economics  is  the  dismal  science,  the  study 
of  hunting-gathering  economics  must  be  its 
most  advanced  branch.  Almost  totally  com- 
mitted to  the  argument  that  life  was  hard  in 
the  Paleolithic,  our  textbooks  compete  to 
convey  a sense  of  impending  doom,  leaving  the 
student  to  wonder  not  only  how  hunters 
managed  to  make  a living,  but  whether,  after 
all,  this  was  living?  The  specter  of  starvation 
stalks  the  stalker  in  these  pages.  His  technical 
incompetence  is  said  to  enjoin  continuous  work 
just  to  survive,  leaving  him  without  respite 
from  the  food  quest  and  without  the  leisure  to 
“build  culture.”  Even  so,  for  his  efforts  he  pulls 
the  lowest  grades  in  thermo-dynamics — less 
energy  harnessed  per  capita  per  year  than  any 
other  mode  of  production.  And  in  treatises  on 
economic  development,  he  is  condemned  to 
play  the  role  of  bad  example,  the  so-called 
“subsistence  economy.” 


Discussions,  Part  II  85 

It  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  correct  this 
traditional  wisdom.  Perhaps  then  we  should 
phrase  the  necessary  revisions  in  the  most 
shocking  terms  possible:  that  this  was,  when 
you  come  to  think  of  it,  the  original  affluent 
society.  By  common  understanding  an  affluent 
society  is  one  in  which  all  the  people’s  wants 
are  easily  satisfied ; and  though  we  are  pleased 
to  consider  this  happy  condition  the  unique 
achievement  of  industrial  civilization,  a better 
case  can  be  made  for  hunters  and  gatherers, 
even  many  of  the  marginal  ones  spared  to 
ethnography.  For  wants  are  “easily  satisfied,” 
either  by  producing  much  or  desiring  little, 
and  there  are,  accordingly,  two  possible  roads 
to  affluence.  The  Galbraithean  course  makes 
assumptions  peculiarly  appropriate  to  market 
economies,  that  man’s  wants  are  great,  not  to 
say  infinite,  whereas  his  means  are  limited, 
although  improvable.  Thus  the  gap  between 
means  and  ends  can  eventually  be  narrowed  by 
industrial  productivity,  at  least  to  the  extent 
that  “urgent”  goods  became  abundant.  But 
there  is  also  a Zen  solution  to  scarcity  and 
affluence,  beginning  from  premises  opposite 
from  our  own,  that  human  material  ends  are 
few  and  finite  and  technical  means  unchanging 
but  on  the  whole  adequate.  Adopting  the  Zen 
strategy,  a people  can  enjoy  an  unparalleled 
material  plenty,  though  perhaps  only  a low 
standard  of  living.  That  I think  describes  the 
hunters.1 

The  traditional  dismal  view  of  the  hunter’s 
fix  is  pre-anthropological.  It  goes  back  to  the 
time  Adam  Smith  was  writing,  and  maybe  to 
a time  before  anyone  was  writing.  But  anthro- 
pology, especially  evolutionary  enthropology, 
found  it  congenial,  even  necessary  theoreti- 
cally, to  adopt  the  same  tone  of  reproach. 
Archeologists  and  ethnologists  had  become 
Neolithic  revolutionaries,  and  in  their  en- 
thusiasm for  the  revolution  found  serious 
shortcomings  in  the  Old  (Stone  Age)  Regime. 
Scholars  extolled  a Neolithic  Great  Leap  For- 
ward. Some  spoke  of  a changeover  from  human 
effort  to  domesticated  energy  sources,  as  if 
people  had  been  liberated  by  a new  labor- 
saving  device,  although  in  fact  the  basic  power 

1.  I realize  that  the  Netsilik  Eskimo  as  described  by 
Balikci  constitute  an  exception  in  point.  I shall  not  speak 
to  this  case  here,  but  second  Richard  Lee’s  explanation 
(or  disposition)  of  it  (Chapter  4,  this  volume). 


86  Ecology  and  Economics 

resources  remained  exactly  the  same,  plants 
and  animals,  the  development  occurring  rather 
in  techniques  of  appropriation  (i.e.,  domestica- 
tion. Moreover,  archeological  research  was 
beginning  to  suggest  that  the  decisive  gains  came 
in  stability  of  settlement  and  gross  economic 
product,  rather  than  productivity  of  labor.) 

But  evolutionary  theory  is  not  entirely  to 
blame.  The  larger  economic  context  in  which 
it  operates,  “as  if  by  an  invisible  hand,”  pro- 
motes the  same  dim  conclusions  about  the 
hunting  life.  Scarcity  is  the  peculiar  obsession 
of  a business  economy,  the  calculable  condi- 
tion of  all  who  participate  in  it.  The  market 
makes  freely  available  a dazzling  array  of  pro- 
ducts all  these  “good  things”  within  a man’s 
reach — but  never  his  grasp,  for  one  never  has 
enough  to  buy  everything.  To  exist  in  a market 
economy  is  to  live  out  a double  tragedy,  begin- 
ning in  inadequacy  and  ending  in  deprivation. 
All  economic  activity  starts  from  a position  of 
shortage:  whether  as  producer,  consumer,  or 
seller  of  labor,  one’s  resources  are  insufficient 
to  the  possible  uses  and  satisfactions.  So  one 
comes  to  a conclusion — “you  pays  your  money 
and  you  takes  your  choice.”  But  then,  every 
acquisition  is  simultaneously  a deprivation,  for 
every  purchase  of  something  is  a denial  of 
something  else  that  could  have  been  had  in- 
stead. (The  point  is  that  if  you  buy  one  kind  of 
automobile,  say  a Plymouth  fastback,  you  can- 
not also  have  a Ford  Mustang — and  I judge 
from  the  TV  commercials  that  the  depriva- 
tion involved  is  more  than  material.)  Inade- 
quacy is  the  judgment  decreeed  by  our 
economy,  and  thus  the  axiom  of  our  economics : 
the  application  of  scarce  means  against  alter- 
nate ends.  We  stand  sentenced  to  life  at  hard 
labor.  It  is  from  this  anxious  vantage  that  we 
look  back  on  the  hunter.  But  if  modern  man, 
with  all  his  technical  advantages,  still  hasn’t 
got  the  wherewithal,  what  chance  has  this 
naked  savage  with  his  puny  bow  and  arrow? 
Having  equipped  the  hunter  with  bourgeois 
impulses  and  Paleolithic  tools,  we  judge  his 
situation  hopeless  in  advance. 

Scarcity  is  not  an  intrinsic  property  of  tech- 
nical means.  It  is  a relation  between  means 
and  ends.  We  might  entertain  the  empirical 
possibility  that  hunters  are  in  business  for  their 
health,  a finite  objective,  and  bow  and  arrow 
are  adequate  to  that  end.  A fair  case  can  be 


made  that  hunters  often  work  much  less  than 
we  do,  and  rather  than  a grind  the  food  quest 
is  intermittent,  leisure  is  abundant,  and  there 
is  more  sleep  in  the  daytime  per  capita  than  in 
any  other  conditions  of  society.  (Perhaps  cer- 
tain traditional  formulae  are  better  inverted: 
the  amount  of  work  per  capita  increases  with 
the  evolution  of  culture  and  the  amount  of 
leisure  per  capita  decreases.)  Moreover,  hun- 
ters seem  neither  harassed  nor  anxious.  A 
certain  confidence,  at  least  in  many  cases,  at- 
tends their  economic  attitudes  and  decisions. 
The  way  they  dispose  of  food  on  hand,  for 
example — as  if  they  had  it  made. 

This  is  the  case  even  among  many  present 
marginal  hunters — who  hardly  constitute  a fair 
test  of  Paleolithic  economy  but  something  of  a 
supreme  test.  Considering  the  poverty  in  which 
hunter  and  gatherers  live  in  theory,  it  comes 
as  a surprise  that  Bushmen  who  live  in  the 
Kalahari  enjoy  “a  kind  of  material  plenty” 
(Marshall,  1961,  p.  243).  Marshall  is  speaking 
of  non-subsistence  production;  in  this  context 
her  explication  seems  applicable  beyond  the 
Bushmen.  She  draws  attention  to  the  technical 
simplicity  of  the  non-subsistence  sector:  the 
simple  and  readily  available  raw  materials, 
skills,  and  tools.  But  most  important,  wants  are 
restricted:  a few  people  are  happy  to  consider 
few  things  their  good  fortune.  The  restraint  is 
imposed  by  nomadism.  Of  the  hupter,  it  is  truly 
said  that  this  wealth  is  a burden  (at  least  for 
his  wife).  Goods  and  mobility  are  therefore 
soon  brought  into  contradiction,  and  to  take 
liberties  with  a line  of  Lattimore’s,  the  pure  no- 
mad remains  a poor  nomad.  It  is  only  consis- 
tent with  their  mobility,  as  many  accounts 
directly  say,  that  among  hunters  needs  are 
limited,  avarice  inhibited,  and — Warner  (1937 
[ 1 958] , p.  137)  makes  this  very  clear  for  the 
Murngin — portability  is  a main  value  in  the 
economic  scheme  of  things. 

A similar  case  of  affluence  without  abun- 
dance can  be  made  for  the  subsistence  sector. 
McCarthy  and  McArthur’s  time-motion  study 
in  Arnhem  Land  (i960)  indicates  the  food 
quest  is  episodic  and  discontinuous,  and  per 
capita  commitment  to  it  averages  less  than  four 
hours  a day  (see  accompanying  Figs.  1 and  2). 
The  amount  of  daytime  sleep  and  rest  is  un- 
conscionable: clearly,  the  aborigines  fail  to 
“build  culture”  not  from  lack  of  time  but  from 


(Av) 


2'  15"  2'45" 

I*  30"  l'  0" 
Most  of  day 
Intarmittenr 

Intermittent  and  most 


Most  of  day 
Several  Hours 

2'q"  2'0" 

50 " 50" 

Afternoon 
Afternoon 
12  Intermittent, afternoon 

14  3'  15"  3'  15"  I 


1 'cfC*  3 50/day(Av.) 


^ f ||  ^<j>  = 31 44/'  day  (Av.) 

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  II  12  13  14 

Day 

Figure  i.  Hours  per  Day  in  Food-Connected  Activities:  Fish  Creek  Group 
(constructed  from  McCarthy  and  McArthur,  i960,  p.  190). 


idle  hands.  McCarthy  and  McArthur  also  sug- 
gest that  the  people  are  working  under  capa- 
city—they  might  have  easily  procured  more 
food;  that  they  are  able  to  support  unproduc- 
tive adults — who  may,  however,  do  some  craft 
work;  and  that  getting  food  was  not  strenuous 


or  exhausting.  The  Arnhem  Land  study,  made 
under  artificial  conditions  and  based  only  on 
short-run  observations,  is  plainly  inconclusive 
in  itself.  Nevertheless,  the  Arnhem  Land  data 
are  echoed  in  reports  of  other  Australians  and 
other  hunters.  Two  famous  explorers  of  the 


88  Ecology  and  Economics 


Figure  2.  Hours  per  Day  in  Food-Connected  Activities:  Hemple  Bay  Group 
(constructed  from  McCarthy  and  McArthur,  i960,  p.  1 9 1 ) . 


earlier  nineteenth  century  made  estimates  of 
the  same  magnitude  for  the  aborigines’  sub- 
sistence activities:  two  to  four  hours  a day 
(Eyre,  1845,  2,  pp.  252,  255;  Grey,  1841,  2, 
pp.  261-63).  Slash-and-burn  agriculture,  inci- 
dentally, may  be  more  labor-intensive : Conk- 
lin, for  example,  figures  that  1,200  man  hours 
per  adult  per  year  are  given  among  the 


Hanunoo  simply  to  agriculture  (Conklin,  195  7 
p.  1 51  : this  figure  excludes  other  food-con- 
nected activities,  whereas  the  Australian  data 
include  time  spent  in  the  preparation  of  food 
as  well  as  its  acquisition).  The  Arnhem 
Landers’  punctuation  of  steady  work  with  sus- 
tained idleness  is  also  widely  attested  in 
Australia  and  beyond.  In  Lee’s  paper  he 


reported  that  productive  members  of  !Kung 
Bushman  camps  spend  two  to  three  days  per 
week  in  subsistence.  We  have  heard  similar 
comments  in  other  papers  at  the  symposium. 
Hadza  women  were  said  to  work  two  hours 
per  day  on  the  average  in  gathering  food,  and 
one  concludes  from  James  Woodburn’s  excel- 
lent film  that  Hadza  men  are  much  more  pre- 
occupied with  games  of  chance  than  chances 
of  game  (Woodburn  and  Hudson,  1966). 

In  addition,  evidence  on  hunter-gatherers’ 
economic  attitudes  and  decisions  should  be 
brought  to  bear.  Harrassment  is  not  implied  in 
the  descriptions  of  their  nonchalant  move- 
ments from  camp  to  camp,  nor  indeed  is  the 
familiar  condemnations  of  their  laziness.  A cer- 
tain issue  is  posed  by  exasperated  comments  on 
the  prodigality  of  hunters,  their  inclination  to 
make  a feast  of  everything  on  hand ; as  if,  one 
Jesuit  said  of  the  Montagnais,  “the  game  they 
were  to  hunt  was  shut  up  in  a stable”  (Le 
Jeune’s  Relation  of  1634,  in  Kenton,  1927,  1, 
p.  182).  “Not  the  slightest  thought  of,  or  care 
for,  what  the  morrow  may  bring  forth,”  wrote 
Spencer  and  Gillen  (1899,  p.  53).  Two  inter- 
pretations of  this  supposed  lack  of  foresight  are 
possible:  either  they  are  fools,  or  they  are  not 
worried — that  is,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned, 
the  morrow  will  bring  more  of  the  same. 
Rather  than  anxiety,  it  would  seem  the  hunters 
have  a confidence  born  of  affluence,  of  a con- 
dition in  which  all  the  people’s  wants  (such  as 
they  are)  are  generally  easily  satisfied.  This 
confidence  does  not  desert  them  during  hard- 
ship. It  can  carry  them  laughing  through 
periods  that  would  try  even  a Jesuit’s  soul,  and 
worry  him  so  that — as  the  Indians  warn — he 
could  become  sick: 

I saw  them  [the  Montagnais]  in  their  hardships 
and  their  labors,  suffer  with  cheerfulness.  ...  I 
found  myself,  with  them,  threatened  with  great 
suffering;  they  said  to  me,  “We  shall  be  some- 
times two  days,  sometimes  three,  without  eating, 
for  lack  of  food;  take  courage,  Chihine,  let  thy 
soul  be  strong  to  endure  suffering  and  hardship; 
keep  thyself  from  being  sad,  otherwise  thou  will 
be  sick;  see  how  we  do  not  cease  to  laugh, 
although  we  have  little  to  eat”  (Le  Jeune’s 
Relation  of  1634,  in  Kenton,  1927,  1,  p.  129). 

Again  on  another  occasion  Le  Jeune’s  host  said 


Discussions,  Part  II  89 

to  him:  “Do  not  let  thyself  be  cast  down,  take 
courage;  when  the  snow  comes,  we  shall  eat” 
(Le  Jeune’s  Relation  of  1634,  in  Kenton,  1927, 
1,  p.  1 71).  Which  is  something  like  the  philo- 
sophy of  the  Penan  of  Borneo:  “If  there  is  no 
food  today  there  will  be  tomorrow” — express- 
ing, according  to  Needham,  “a  confidence  in 
the  capacity  of  the  environment  to  support 
them,  and  in  their  own  ability  to  extract  their 
livelihood  from  it”  (1954,  p.  230). 

gc.  Does  Hunting  Bring  Happiness? 

Speakers:  Alland,  L.  Binford,  Crocker, Helm,  Hiatt, 
Marshall,  Owen,  Suttles,  Turnbull,  Williams, 
Woodburn. 

Hiatt  : I think  one  may  follow  even  further 
the  point  of  Marshall  Sahlins’  paper  and  raise 
a question  about  the  mentality  of  hunter- 
gatherers.  Lee  and  DeVore  have  said  that  one 
of  the  points  that  we  might  consider  would  be 
“nomadic  style.”  In  light  of  what  Sahlins  said, 
I wonder  whether  we  ought  also  to  talk  about 
the  “parasitic  mentality.”  What  he  said  cer- 
tainly fits  the  aborigines;  they  are,  so  to  speak, 
a happy-go-lucky  people.  I wonder  whether 
this  description  applies  to  the  other  hunters 
and  gatherers  that  we  have  heard  about  dur- 
ing this  conference. 

Williams:  I think  I may  have  an  aberrant 
group  in  many  senses;  they  seem  not  to  be  so 
well  off  as  some  of  the  groups  described  here; 
they  hunt  and  are  hungry  most  of  the  time; 
and  they  really  do  not  laugh  a lot.  However,  I 
will  give  Marshall  Sahlins  the  point  that  they 
do  not  worry  much  about  it  or  try  to  change 
the  situation. 

Helm  : I do  not  think  the  thesis  of  confidence 
in  the  yield  of  tomorrow  holds  for  the  boreal 
forest  peoples.  Rather,  my  reading  of  northern 
Indian  equanimity  is  that  it  is  fatalistic  rather 
than  optimistic : If  either  the  day  or  the  morrow 
does  not  provide  for  itself,  there  is  little  one 
can  do  about  it. 

Owen  : No  one  has  ever  accused  the  Y uman- 
speaking  nomads  of  being  especially  jolly.  The 
group  that  I worked  with  in  Baja  California 
are  now  deculturated  and  are  peasant  farmers 
in  a certain  sense.  Perhaps  their  concern  with 
farming  has  some  relevance  to  what  June  Helm 


go  Ecology  and  Economics 

has  just  suggested,  because  it  is  precisely  to- 
morrow that  they  are  unconcerned  about, 
since  they  have  no  real  control  over  it.  They 
muster  enough  energy  to  plow  a field  and  sow 
it,  but  then  their  uncertainty  about  the  future 
creeps  in  and  they  let  it  go.  The  cattle  eat  the 
crops,  and  that’s  God’s  will,  by  God.  Now,  this 
would  suggest  to  me  that  these  populations — 
who  have,  never  known  any  great  abundance  — 
are  unconcerned  with  tomorrow  because  they 
cannot  control  it,  rather  than  because  they 
expect  that  it  will  take  care  of  itself. 

Suttles:  In  response,  again,  to  Hiatt’s  ques- 
tion, the  Northwest  coast  Indians  have  never 
been  called  happy-go-lucky,  so  far  as  I know. 
Of  course,  they  do  plan  for  the  future  and  may 
have  been  trapped  into  this,  in  Sahlins’  terms. 
It  is  this,  I think,  that  makes  them  different 
from  others  that  we  have  discussed. 

Alland:  As  I understand  it,  the  Naskapi 
also  worry  and  care  about  the  morrow,  and 
they  handle  this  in  a magical  way  by  throwing 
a scapula  into  the  fire  and  thus  determining 
the  direction  to  be  taken  in  future  hunts.  And 
Omar  Moore  (1957)  has  suggested  that  this 
incidentally  helps  them  to  maximize  hunting, 
since  it  randomizes  the  hunting  territories  they 
exploit  so  that  the  animals  do  not  become 
accustomed  to  being  hunted  in  a particular 
place.  At  any  rate,  whether  or  not  this  model 
works,  there  is  evidence  again  that  a hunting 
group  may  be  anxious  about  the  future  and  will 
try  to  do  something  about  the  morrow. 

Binford  : 1 1 might  be  interesting  to  speculate 
about  the  “happiness”  of  the  people  responsible 
for  the  archeological  remains  recently  un- 
covered by  R.  S.  MacNeish  (1964)  in  the 
Tehuacan  Valley.  These  people  were  coping 
with  their  environment  during  the  period  of 
initial  use  of  domesticated  plants.  Judging 
from  the  archeology,  they  lived  in  an  arid  area 
which  did  not  compare  favorably  with  the 
Bushman  habitat,  particularly  in  regard  to  the 
availability  of  native  tuberous  roots  and  other 
dependable  wild  plant  sources.  The  impetus  to 
invest  in  the  development  of  storage  tech- 
nology and  in  the  horticultural  perfection  of 
certain  plants  must  have  occurred  in  the  con- 
text of  “some  concern”  for  the  future.  I was 
pleased  to  hear  Dr.  Suttles  say  that  the  hunters 
of  the  Northwest  coast  also  showed  concern, 
since  they  depended  heavily  on  resources 


which  were  exploited  for  limited  periods  and 
stored  for  future  consumption.  The  Tehuaca- 
nos’  similarly  increased  the  time  utility  of  their 
resources  through  storage  and  preservation 
techniques.  I suspect  that  the  people  of  the 
Tehuacan  Valley  were  not  very  “happy”  in 
the  sense  suggested  earlier. 

The  happiness  factor  may  not,  after  all,  be 
so  much  a direct  function  of  hunting;  happi- 
ness should  vary  directly  with  the  degree  to 
which  subsistence  input  levels  are  main- 
tained in  a steady  state  despite  seasonal  fluc- 
tuations in  yield  from  the  standing  crop  of 
available  resources.  Increased  sedentism  to- 
gether with  storage  and  preservation  tech- 
niques, as  in  the  cases  of  the  Tehuacanos  and 
the  Northwest  coast  Indians,  was,  at  least 
initially,  a response  to  the  failure  to  maintain 
such  a steady  state.  It  is  expectable  that  such 
adaptations  would  be  coupled  with  “concern 
for  tomorrow.” 

In  contrast,  one  might  expect  to  find  a more 
happy-go-lucky  attitude  among  groups  which 
have  achieved  a homeostatic  relationship  with 
regard  to  food  resources.  Such  a group  might 
move  from  one  resource  area  to  another,  con- 
suming immediately  available  products;  or  a 
group  might  gain  time  utility  from  resources 
through  storage  and  preservation  techniques 
and  stabilize  population  below  the  point  at 
which  exploitation  of  the  standing  crop  would 
threaten  productivity.  The  point  here  is  that 
“happiness”  in  the  sense  of  little  cafe  for  to- 
morrow would  be  more  a function  of  homeo- 
stasis than  of  hunting  per  se. 

If  we  can  judge  from  the  tremendous  con- 
servatism and  stability  of  many  Pleistocene 
hunting  adaptations  and  from  the  stability 
and  tenacity  of  some  groups  of  modern  hun- 
ters, there  are  many  hunting  groups  which 
have  achieved  a balanced  equilibrium  with 
their  environment.  I am  suggesting  that  it  is 
this  tendency  of  hunting  adaptations  to  reach 
homeostasis  which  makes  for  the  “happy 
hunter.” 

Crocker:  I thought  we  had  buried  the  Ge- 
speaking  peoples  today  with  our  emphasis  on 
pure  hunting  subsistence,  but  I find  that  the 
hunter’s  mentality  now  being  described  fits  the 
Canella.  Yet  they  have  a great  deal  of  agricul- 
ture and  may,  in  earlier  times,  have  had  even 
more.  This  raises  a problem.  If  we  are  going  to 


talk  about  the  hunter’s  mentality,  maybe  we 
have  to  talk  about  peoples  who  have  other 
modes  of  subsistence — even,  perhaps,  fully 
agricultural  peoples.  It  is  a question  of  the 
yardstick  that  we  use  and  the  purposes  we  are 
pursuing. 

Woodburn:  It  may  be  worth  mentioning  a 
lack  of  commitment  different  from  the  lack  of 
commitment  to  the  morrow  and  yet, perhaps, 
related  to  it.  The  Hadza  are  strikingly  uncom- 
mitted to  each  other;  what  happens  to  other 
individual  Hadza,  even  close  relatives,  does 
not  really  matter  very  much.  People  are  often 
very  affectionate  to  each  other,  but  the  affec- 
tion is  generally  not  accompanied  by  much 
sense  of  responsibility.  If  someone  becomes  ill, 
he  is  likely  to  be  tended  only  so  long  as  this  is 
convenient. 

Now,  in  the  literature  on  hunters  and 
gatherers,  abandonment  of  the  sick  is  quite  fre- 
quently mentioned  and  is  almost  invariably 
interpreted  as  deriving  directly  from  ecological 
pressures.  The  notion  is  that  an  individual  is 
abandoned  only  through  necessity,  when  the 
survival  of  other  people  is  at  stake.  But  this 
explanation  does  not  make  sense  of  the  case 
material  I collected  among  the  Hadza  and  I 
strongly  suspect  that  it  also  does  not  adequately 
explain  the  incidence  of  abandonment  in  most 
other  societies  from  which  the  custom  is  re- 
corded. In  one  of  the  cases  of  which  I have 
records,  a boy  became  paralyzed  below  the 
waist,  probably  from  poliomyelitis.  He  was 
carried  for  quite  a number  of  camp  moves. 
Then,  on  one  occasion,  the  people  of  the  camp 
moved  to  a site  where  they  had  expected  to 
find  water  and  found  none.  They  were  perhaps 
only  about  four  or  five  miles  from  water,  but 
they  had  reached  the  point  at  which  it  had 
become  rather  tedious  to  carry  him  for  the 
unexpected  additional  move  when  they  were 
rather  tired  and  rather  thirsty.  So  they  left 
him  behind  with  food  and  water  and  with  his 
bow  and  arrows — not  that  these  were  of  much 
use  to  him— and  he  did  not  survive.  Those  who 
abandoned  him  included  his  own  mother  and 
certain  other  close  relatives.  A similar  lack  of 
commitment  to  other  people  is  apparent  in 
many  other  contexts. 

For  an  explanation,  I think  we  should  look 
beyond  the  obvious  ecological  factors.  We 
should  give  far  more  attention  to  the  consis- 


Discussions,  Part  II  9 1 

tency  of  this  behavior  with  the  degree  to  which 
social  relationships  bind  individuals  to  each 
other.  With  a few  exceptions,  a Hadza  does  not 
depend  on  specific  individuals  standing  in  par- 
ticular relationships  to  him  for  access  to  pro- 
perty or  to  adult  status,  or  for  assistance  in 
cooperative  activities.  In  this  respect  the  Hadza 
and  similar  hunters  and  gatherers  differ  very 
fundamentally  from  most  other  tribal  societies. 

I would  suggest  that  much  of  the  sort  of  be- 
havior which  Marshall  Sahlins  has  described — 
the  listlessness,  the  apathy,  the  merry  squand- 
ering of  windfalls,  the  lack  of  concern  for  the 
morrow — is  intimately  bound  up  with  this 
relative  lack  of  responsibility  to  specific  other 
individuals,  the  relative  absence  of  binding 
obligations  to  them.  I am  not  suggesting  for 
one  moment  that  this  applies  to  all  hunters 
and  gatherers  but  I certainly  do  think  that  it 
may  apply  to  many  of  them.  It  may  also  have 
applied  to  many  ancient  hunters  and  we  ought 
to  bear  this  in  mind  when  considering  why  their 
populations  apparently  remained  stable  over 
so  vast  a period. 

Turnbull:  I would  like  to  support  Wood- 
burn’s  observations  with  data  on  the  Ik. 
There  is  an  almost  exact  parallel,  and  I have 
seen  abandonment  without  any  kind  of  emo- 
tion whatsoever.  One  person  was  shot  in  the 
stomach  in  a raid  at  about  one  o’clock  in  the 
morning  and  was  still  conscious  when  I was 
first  told  about  it  at  six  o’clock  in  the  morning, 
and  people  had  done  nothing  about  him  except 
to  fold  him  into  the  death  position.  They  only 
began  to  take  an  interest  in  him  when  I began 
to  wonder  what  I should  do  about  it. 

I think  this  also  bears  on  what  Hiatt  said 
about  the  mentality  of  the  hunter.  Both  the 
Pygmies  and  the  Ik  laugh  a lot;  in  fact,  they 
get  quite  hysterical.  But  this  does  not  mean  that 
they  do  not  also  cry.  At  any  rate,  they  are 
violently  emotional.  They  fight  continuously, 
although  the  fighting  is  without  malice.  In 
some  cases,  a Pygmy  camp  may  be  character- 
ized by  innumerable  disputes,  many  of  which 
are  almost  deliberately  created.  They  are  cre- 
ated with  the  specific  objective  of  concealing  a 
real  dispute. 

One  last  point,  not  previously  mentioned,  is 
that  both  these  hunting  communities  are 
characterized  by  an  almost  complete  lack  of 
magic,  witchcraft,  or  sorcery.  I would  like  to 


92  Ecology  and  Econortiics 

hear  more  about  this  from  students  of  other 
societies. 

Marshall:  In  response  to  Colin  Turnbull’s 
last  remark,  I would  like  to  say  that  the  !Kung 
we  worked  with  were  free  from  a belief  that 
there  were  witches  among  them.  They  had  an 
apparently  vague  idea  of  a sorcery-like  power, 
but  spoke  of  other  people  far  away  having  such 
power  and  using  it  for  evil.  IKung  informants 
insisted  that  their  “medicine  men”  only  tried 
to  cure  and  protect  with  their  “medicine.” 

9d.  Hunting  vs.  Gathering 
as  Factors  in  Subsistence 

Speakers:  Alland,  Bicchieri,  L.  Binford,  Lathrap, 
Laughlin,  R.  Lee,  Marshall,  Struever,  Washburn 

Bicchieri:  I would  like  to  point  out  that  in 
my  doctoral  dissertation  on  the  ecology  of  food- 
gathering peoples  (1965)  I utilized  a sample  of 
thirty  societies  very  similar,  in  the  choice  of 
units,  to  the  one  used  by  Lee.  My  analysis  also 
emphasized  the  need  for  determining  the  ac- 
tual dependence  of  a specified  group  on  hunt- 
ing versus  gathering.  It  appears  to  me  that  it  is 
essential,  for  meaningful  cross-cultural  com- 
parison, that  the  relative  amount  of  a group’s 
dependence  on  hunting  as  contrasted  to  gather- 
ing to  be  specified.  The  term  “hunters” — as 
used  by  J.  H.  Steward — tends  to  obscure  the 
actual  exploitative  condition,  and,  as  a conse- 
quence, inhibits  inferences  regarding  socio- 
economic covariations.  One  basic  implication, 
for  example,  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  chances  of 
productive  failure,  everything  else  being  equal, 
are  halved  by  a mixed  hunting-gathering  ex- 
ploitation. Practicing  such  mixed  exploitation, 
a group  can,  more  often  than  not,  fall  back  on 
the  alternative  technique  when  necessary.  Thus 
the  Kalahari  Bushmen,  with  a hunting  and 
gathering  subsistence  base  are  likely  to  resist 
environmental  failures  more  readily  than,  for 
instance,  the  Copper  Eskimo  who  have  to  rely 
solely  on  hunting. 

Struever  : This  distinction  between  hunting 
and  gathering  interests  me.  It  may  be  useful 
for  solving  some  problems,  but  irrelevant  to 
others.  For  example,  if  our  object  is  to  under- 
stand the  considerable  complexity  of  a par- 
ticular collecting  group,  this  is  a problem  of 


productive  potential  of  their  environment  vis- 
a-vis  plants  and/or  animals  and  of  the  effi- 
ciency of  their  exploitative  and  maintenance 
technology.  A hunting-gathering  distinction 
has  no  value  for  solving  this  particular 
prQblem. 

Also,  we  have  not  really  defined  what  we 
mean  by  the  hunting-gathering  distinction. 
Are  we  talking  about  differences  in  the  food 
substances  themselves — plant  materials  vs. 
flesh,  or  is  the  distinction  a technological  one, 
i.e.,  hunting  and  gathering  technologies  can  be 
distinguished  from  each  other?  If  the  distinc- 
tion is  technological,  would  you  call  the  col- 
lecting of  migratory  waterfowl  by  means  of 
traps  or  cast  nets  gathering  or  hunting  ? Would 
you  call  herding  fish  onto  mud  flats  or  draining 
lakes  and  then  collecting  the  fish  population, 
gathering  or  fishing? 

But  the  problem  of  distinguishing  hunting 
from  gathering  seems  peripheral  to  our  major 
interests  which  center  more  on  the  produc- 
tivity of  an  environment  vis-^-vis  non- 
domesticant  resources  and  how  human  groups 
structure  themselves  socially  and  demographi- 
cally  to  use  a technology  of  measurable 
efficiency  to  exploit  this  environment. 

Laughlin:  It  is  interesting  to  notice  the 
kinds  of  information  that  are  discarded  if  the 
catching  of  sea  mammals  is  classified  as  fishing, 
rather  than  hunting.  One  of  these  losses  is  in 
our  understanding  of  the  development  of  some 
kinds  of  technology.  Now,  most  of  the  sea  mam- 
mals are  hunted  from  kayaks,  which  have  enor- 
mous advantages  over  open  boats  like  umiaks 
(which,  in  turn,  have  great  advantages  over 
intertidal  zone  collecting).  When  it  comes  to 
input-output  analysis,  we  must  count  the  ex- 
tensive training  of  a child  to  become  a kayak 
hunter.  A second  major  time  investment  is  in 
the  scanning  operation;  though  this  is  still 
quicker  and  more  efficient  from  a kayak  than, 
say,  scanning  on  foot  along  a coastline. 

Binford  : While  I am  in  complete  sympathy 
with  obtaining  quantitative  data  on  sub- 
sistence, I think  that  the  emphasis  on  the  per- 
centage contribution  of  gathering  versus 
hunting  to  total  subsistence  may  divert  us  from 
a major  point  of  ecological  studies — the  dy- 
namics of  human  adaptations  in  various  en- 
vironments. For  example,  if  we  are  concerned 
with  trying  to  understand  human  radiations 


from  a relatively  limited  range  in  the  basal 
Pleistocene,  it  becomes  critical  to  understand 
variations  in  the  structuring  of  subsistence 
resources  through  the  phasing  of  an  annual 
cycle  among  the  major  environmental  zones 
which  man  successively  penetrated.  We  might 
reasonably  expect  that  hunting  played  very 
different  roles  in  particular  habitats.  Man’s 
radiation  was,  in  general,  from  a relatively  dry 
semitropical  park  savanna  through  zones  of 
increasing  year-’round  dampness  and  annual 
cold.  In  environments  of  the  latter  type  perma- 
nent resident  fauna  include  a relatively  high 
proportion  of  predators;  herbivores  are  either 
seasonal  residents,  or  are  very  rare  in  species 
numbers,  or  they  are  represented  by  species 
which  hibernate  during  the  months  when 
plants  are  dormant  or  blanketed  with  snow.  In 
penetrating  the  more  northerly  environmental 
zones,  man  must  have  put  greater  reliance  on 
hunting  (predation)  and  on  the  development 
of  storage  and  preservation  techniques.  A 
small  amount  of  available  meat  during  periods 
of  plant  food  scarcity  might  have  been  more 
crucial  to  survival  than  the  vast  quantities  of 
plant  foods  available  during  times  of  plenty. 

To  point  out  that  non-agriculturalists  living 
in  relatively  arid  and  sub-tropical  environ- 
ments are  heavily  dependent  on  plant  foods 
tells  us  little  about  the  importance  of  hunting 
in  the  evolutionary  history  of  man  and  culture, 
nor  does  it  provide  a basis  for  generalizing 
about  the  role  of  hunting  in  adaptations  to 
different  environments. 

Alland:  I agree  with  Lee’s  input-output 
model,  and  I think  it  makes  sense  in  terms  of 
nutritional  requirements.  People  require  a 
rather  large  number  of  calories  in  order  to 
subsist,  but  they  require  only  a rather  small 
amount  of  protein — 45-50  grams  per  day  of 
animal  protein  and  perhaps  a bit  more  in  vege- 
table protein.  These  things  should  also  be 
measured.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  investment 
of  calories  in  getting  animals  may  be  greater 
than  the  output  in  calories;  yet  if  the  caloric 
output  of  gathering  vegetables  shows  a surplus, 
you  find  a surviving  society. 

Lee:  To  carry  on  the  points  made  by  Bin- 
ford  and  Alland,  I might  say  that  when  we 
think  of  man  the  hunter,  we  generally  think  of 
the  higher  latitudes:  the  temperate  and  arctic 
zones;  while  the  concept  of  man  the  eclectic 


Discussions,  Part  II  93 

subsister  calls  to  mind  the  middle  and  low 
latitudes,  i.e.,  the  tropical  zones.  This  eclecti- 
cism and  emphasis  on  vegetable  foods  appears 
even  in  the  game-rich  environments,  as  the 
Hadza  case  shows. 

To  take  up  a physiological  point:  eating  a 
lot  of  meat  just  does  not  make  physiological 
sense  in  the  Bushmen  case,  because  it  takes  five 
times  as  much  energy  (with  heat  generated  in 
proportion)  to  process  by  digestion  a unit  of 
meat  as  it  takes  to  process  a unit  of  vegetable 
food  (Bourliere,  1964,  p.  336).  So  in  a cold 
area,  it  makes  good  sense  to  eat  a lot  of  meat; 
but  in  a hot  area,  the  reverse  is  true. 

Washburn:  Another  nutritional  point  is 
that  man  the  animal  is  adapted  to  certain  kinds 
of  food.  He  has  to  have  certain  things  in  his 
food  supply,  and  this  makes  measurements  by 
quantity  tricky.  We  are  dealing  with  an 
animal  that  has  relied  on  meat  as  part  of  his 
diet  for  at  least  a couple  of  million  years,  so 
20  per  cent,  or  even  a smaller  quantity  of  meat, 
may  be  a very  important  constituent  of  the 
total  diet. 

Lathrap  : I would  like  to  inject  a word  of 
caution  here.  Most  of  the  hunters  whom  we 
have  been  discussing  so  far  during  this  con- 
ference are  peoples  who  live  in  environments 
not  particularly  favorable  to  hunting,  or  who 
share  their  territory  with  more  complex  groups. 
The  Ona  bands  of  northern  Tierra  del  Fuego 
survived  into  the  first  decade  of  the  present 
century  in  an  unacculturated  condition.  Here 
we  find  people  with  good  hunting  territories 
which  they  jealously  defended  from  all  out- 
siders. The  larger  part  of  their  caloric  intake 
was  from  game  (the  guanaco  being  the  prime 
source),  and  only  minimal  use  was  made  of 
vegetable  foods. 

Interestingly  enough,  all  of  the  classic  stig- 
mata of  “hunting  peoples,”  which  have  been 
brought  into  question  at  this  symposium,  were 
strongly  developed  among  the  several  Ona 
bands,  which  were  in  fact  patrilineal.  Patri- 
lineages  were  clearly  defined  and  strictly  exo- 
gamous.  Each  held  a sharply  delineated 
territory  with  absolute  rights  over  the  included 
economic  resources.  The  facts  of  the  case  are 
reasonably  clear  since  we  have  a good  account 
of  the  culture  written  by  Bridges  (1949)  who 
actually  lived  with  Ona  bands  while  the  culture 
was  still  flourishing.  There  are  also  more  formal 


94  Ecology  and  Economics 

and  detailed  ethnographies  culled  from  the 
memories  of  Ona  informants  who  had  partici- 
pated in  the  aboriginal  situation  (Gusinde, 
I 93 *-391  Lothrop,  1928). 

With  regard  to  the  question  of  the  “hunter’s 
mentality”  the  Ona  are  particularly  instruc- 
tive. Ona  culture  stressed  emotional  control, 
and  Bridges’  account  makes  it  clear  that  this 
particular  ethical  imperative  was  observed  far 
more  often  than  it  was  breached.  There  were  a 
number  of  ingenious  institutions  which  were 
effective  in  minimizing  intraband  hostilities 
and  in  channeling  agression  toward  outsiders 
or  toward  wives,  who  in  strict  sense  were  out- 
siders. The  Ona  both  preached  and  practiced 
the  support  of  the  aged. 

When  we  consider  projecting  cultural  traits 
and  modal  personality  structures  backward  to 
a time  when  most  hunters  presumably  found 
themselves  in  favorable  circumstances,  we 
might  find  the  example  of  the  Ona  more 
instructive  than  that  of  the  handful  of  still 
extant  hunti ng  groups  who  are  scarcely  maki ng 
a go  of  it  as  hunters. 

Marshall:  I hope  that  there  will  be  more 
discussion  about  the  attitudes  of  hunting- 
gathering peoples  toward  gathering.  Assuming 
that  there  is  more  food  to  be  gathered,  why  do 
they  not  gather  more  at  a time  ? The  Hadza 
gather  for  only  two  or  three  hours  a day,  the 
IKung,  perhaps  more  hours,  but  only  on  an 
average  every  other  day,  or  sometimes  one  in 
three  days.  It  has  been  suggested  that  because 
they  do  not  have  to  work  every  day  they  can  be 
said  to  have  an  “affluent  society.”  This  is  a bon 
mot,  but  does  not  add  to  the  understanding  of 
the  reasons.  I have  pointed  out  that  the  IKung 
we  worked  with  are  all  thin  and  that  they 
constantly  expressed  concern  and  anxiety 
about  food.  There  must  be  reasons  why  they 
do  not  gather  and  eat  more.  I think  that  energy 
for  digging  runs  out  and  the  daylight  hours 
come  to  an  end,  for  one  thing.  It  has  been  sug- 
gested that  they  cannot  eat  more  roots,  berries, 
and  seeds  than  they  do,  because  the  roughage  is 
too  much.  Also,  I believe  we  might  look  more 
into  a possible  social  reason.  If  a woman 
gathered  very  much  more  than  her  family 
needed  at  a given  time,  would  it  turn  out  that 
she  was  working  for  others?  Would  she  draw 
envious  attention  upon  herself  and  be  blamed 
for  not  being  more  generous  if  she  had  an  ex- 


cess of  food  and  kept  it  for  herself?  ( IKung 
custom  requires  that  meat  be  shared,  but  not 
veldkos.) 

9e.  Measuring  Resources 
and  Subsistence  Strategy 

Speakers:  Alland,  L.  Binford,  Birdsell,  Deevey, 
Eggan,  Gardner,  Sahlins. 

Birdsell:  There  has  been  a great  deal  of 
discussion  about  carrying  capacity  and  produc- 
tive potential  and  about  how  much  of  a given 
food  source  could  be  reaped  or  killed.  I suggest 
that  we  really  do  not  know  this  in  any  specific 
case.  I do  not  think  that  ecologists  know  what 
the  combined  human/predator  load  would  be 
for  a given  animal  in  a given  situation.  But, 
against  this,  there  is  considerable  evidence  that 
as  one  food  source  is  overstrained,  people  turn 
to  another  in  compensation.  This  is  par- 
ticularly true  of  shellfish  in  certain  cases  where 
one  species  is  over-reaped  and  there  is  a change 
to  a less  favored  species.  In  other  words,  the 
empirical  proof  is  testable,  but  the  theoretical 
description  of  what  constitutes  overdraft  would 
be  difficult.  We  would  have  to  know  the  total 
ecology  of  the  total  biota  to  come  to  a specific 
statement,  a task  which  probably  would  not  be 
worth  the  trouble. 

Deevey  : By  way  of  poking  a little  fun,  let  me 
note  as  an  ecologist  that  it  is  refreshing  to  find 
that  anthropologists  have  now  discovered  for 
themselves  that  the  Arctic  tundra,  the  temper- 
ate deciduous  forest,  the  tropical  savanna,  and 
the  tropical  rainforest  are  not  all  the  same  kinds 
of  environment,  even  from  the  point  of  view  of 
subsistence.  That  they  are  different  seems  self 
evident  to  an  ecologist,  although  certainly  we 
have  had  trouble  quantifying  these  differences. 
It  is  difficult  to  measure  what  we  call  produc- 
tivity, and  even  when  we  measure  with  modest 
success  the  caloric  content  of  the  vegetation, 
the  apportionment  of  the  caloric  content 
among  the  various  species  is  not  easy  to  meas- 
ure. So  we  have  no  clear  idea  ecologically  as 
to  what  we  mean  by  the  change  in  diversity 
between  arctic,  temperate,  and  tropical  con- 
ditions. It  is  refreshing,  then,  to  see  anthro- 
pologists now  measuring  quantities  that  bear 
on  this. 


Let  me  frame  a question  for  ecologically 
minded  anthropologists  to  answer.  A few  years 
ago  I naively  thought  it  might  be  good  to  total 
up  the  measured  animal  productivity  in  a tem- 
perate deciduous  forest,  just  by  way  of  seeing 
in  theory  how  much  human  protoplasm  a 
given  area  of  the  forest  could  support  on  a 
hunting  and  gathering  economy.  Not  being 
professionally  a terrestrial  ecologist,  I was  sur- 
prised to  find  that  the  animal  productivity  that 
goes  into  deer  and  other  such  “catchable” 
animals  is  a negligible  fraction  of  what  goes 
into  songbirds,  which,  in  turn,  is  a negligible 
fraction  of  what  goes  into  insects.  And  then  I 
looked  at  mice  and  found  that — although  they 
too  are  less  productive  as  an  ongoing  portion 
of  the  ecosystem  than  are  insects — mice  are 
considerably  more  productive  than  either  deer 
or  songbirds.  And  I calculated  that  if  men 
were  capable  of  utilizing  the  annual  yield  of 
mice,  there  ought  to  be  population  densities 
of  the  order  of  ioo  times  as  great  as  those  that 
there  actually  were  in  such  forests. 

It  is  known  that  in  a closely  regulated  pre- 
dator-prey situation,  the  more  the  predator 
takes,  the  more  he  can  get  (up  to  a certain 
point,  naturally).  This  is  because  the  predator 
presses  down  the  demographic  structure  of  the 
prey  population,  so  that  it  is  in  its  maximum 
productive  stage.  The  predator  can  then  take 
the  annual  yield,  which  otherwise  would  be 
lost  to  natural  mortality.  So  I ask  the  ethno- 
graphic experts  whether  there  is  any  evidence 
that  people  anywhere  have  lived  the  year 
round  solely  on  mice. 

Eggan:  Some  well-meaning  group  of  whites 
tried  to  move  a group  of  Shoshone  out  of  a 
desolate  valley,  and  the  Shoshone  answered,  in 
effect:  “What?  Leave  all  these  wonderful  mice 
around  here?” 

Gardner:  I have  wondered  how  the  South 
Indian  Paliyans  managed  to  maintain  a popula- 
tion density  that  must  be  nearly  two  persons 
per  square  mile.  Deevey  gives  us  an  answer — 


Discussions,  Part  II  95 

because  they  catch  mice,  rats,  bats,  . . . and  let 
the  big  game  go ! 

Binford:  In  light  of  Dr.  Deevey’s  statement, 
we  may  be  able  to  restore  the  Tehuacan  people 
to  the  list  of  happy  natives.  A Canadian  by 
the  name  of  Callen  (Callen  and  Cameron, 
i960)  has  studied  the  human  feces  recovered 
from  the  Tehuacan  excavations  and  was  able 
to  get  quantitative  information  on  the  diet  of 
the  people — a rare  thing  indeed.  One  of  the 
more  common  inclusions  in  the  coprolites  was 
undigested  bone  and  hair  of  mice  and  other 
small  rodents. 

Alland  : A simple  example  from  psychology 
might  l»e  applicable  here.  If  rats  are  presented 
with  a learning  situation  in  which  two  stimuli 
are  rewarded  randomly — one  30  per  cent  and 
the  other  70  per  cent  of  the  time — they  soon 
learn  that  it  is  a better  strategy  to  press  the 
70  per  cent  bar  all  of  the  time  than  to  try  to 
figure  out  the  game.  Unfortunately,  humans 
do  not  do  this;  they  try  to  beat  the  game. 
So,  when  there  are  alternate  resources  of 
deer  and  mice,  I suspect  that  they  will  al- 
ways take  the  deer  and  leave  the  mice  for 
emergencies. 

Sahlins:  With  regard  to  Professor  Birdsell’s 
remarks  made  at  the  outset  about  carrying 
capacity,  we  do  have  for  slash-and-burn 
agriculturists  a whole  series  of  estimates  of  their 
relation  to  critical  capacities,  as  measured  by 
their  agricultural  needs — land  in  use  at  a par- 
ticular time,  land  that  they  need  to  have 
available,  etc.  These  techniques,  of  course, 
were  developed  in  Africa  and  applied  to  native 
reserves,  where  it  was  almost  always  discovered 
that  the  people  were  over  capacity.  But  they 
have  since  been  applied  to  peoples  not  on  re- 
serves, for  instance  in  the  South  American 
tropical  forests  and  the  results  nearly  every- 
where indicate  that  population  densities  are 
about  20-50  per  cent  of  capacity — in  other 
words,  in  the  range  mentioned  earlier  by  Dr. 
Washburn. 


Part  III 

Social  and  Territorial  Organization 


IO. 


Ownership  and  Use 

of  Land  among  the  Australian  Aborigines 

L.  R.  HIATT 


Aboriginal  territorial  organization  is  currently 
a subject  of  controversy  (Hiatt,  196s,  1966; 
Stanner,  1965).  I shall  first  present  the  classical 
description,  then  indicate  the  different  picture 
at  present  emerging,  and  finally  raise  some 
speculative  issues  suggested  by  modern  etho- 
logical  research. 

The  Classical  Description 

Radcliffe-Brown  (1931)  distinguished  three 
kinds  of  grouping — tribe,  clan,  and  horde.  A 
tribe  consisted  of  people  who  spoke  the  same 
language  and  occupied  a continuous  tract  of 
land.  It  was  divided  into  patricians,' each  own- 
ing a defined  territory  that  included  a number 
of  totemic  sites.  A horde  consisted  of  the  male 
members  of  a patrician,  their  wives,  and  un- 
married female  members.  It  was  independent 
and  autonomous,  managing  its  own  affairs  and 
acting  as  a unit  in  its  relations  with  other 
hordes. 


The  Recent  Picture 

Elkin  (1950,  pp.  17-18)  stated  that  “the  local 
organization  in  many  tribes  was  not  the  clear- 
cut  patrilineal  patrilocal  exogamous  group 


occupying  a definite  territory  which  some  text- 
books imply.”  Meggitt  (1962)  was  the  first  tc 
assert  specifically  and  in  detail  that  some  of 
Radcliffe-Brown’s  generalizations  did  not  hold 
for  at  least  one  tribe  (the  YValbiri).  My  own 
field  investigations  between  1958  and  i960 
(Hiatt,  1965)  among  the  Gidjingali  of  Arnhem 
Land  also  failed  to  confirm  Radcliffe-Brown’s 
view;  and  subsequently  I drew  attention  to 
similar  material  in  reports  of  earlier  workers 
who  merely  thought  they  had  discovered  iso- 
lated aberrant  forms  (Hiatt,  1962). 

There  is  no  quarrel  with  Radcliffe-Brown’s 
statements  about  the  tribe  as  a linguistic 
division  or  the  patrician  as  a land-owning 
unit.  The  argument  is  about  the  horde — more 
precisely,  about  residential  associations,  exploi- 
tation of  resources,  and  group  movements. 
What  follows  is  a summary  of  my  earlier  paper 
(•962). 

Composition  of  Communities 

Radcliffe-Brown  asserted  that  the  local  unit 
was  based  on  a single  patrician.  Yet  at  least 
seven  observers  since  1 930  have  described  more 
or  less  stable  communities  that  included  mem- 
bers from  two  to  twelve  patricians.  Several 
writers  mention  dispersal  and  reunion  according 
to  seasonal  conditions,  visiting,  and  occasional 


99 


ioo  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

joint  participation  of  several  communities  in 
the  same  ceremony.  The  aborigines  themselves 
saw  these  events  as  temporary  separations 
from  the  main  group  or  temporary  amalgama- 
tions with  other  groups. 

Exploitation  of  Resources 

Radcliffe-Brown  stated  that  each  horde  had  to 
obtain  most  of  its  foods  and  water  from  its  own 
territory.  He  also  wrote:  “Acts  of  trespass 
against  this  exclusive  right  of  a horde  to  its 
territory  seem  to  have  been  very  rare  in  the 
social  life  of  the  aborigines  but  it  appears  to 
have  been  generally  held  that  anyone  com- 
mitting such  a trespass  could  justifiably  be 
killed”  (1952,  pp.  33-34).  Yet  eight  observers 
since  1930  have  reported  that  unrestricted 
movement  of  foodseekers  over  broad  regions 
that  included  the  totemic  sites  of  many  patri- 
cians. This  does  not  mean  that  all  comers  had 
free  access  to  every  locality.  A Walbiri  com- 
munity, for  example,  included  members  of 
from  six  to  twelve  patricians  who  habitually 
ranged  over  a defined  area  that  included  the 
totemic  estates  of  the  constituent  clans.  But 
they  entered  the  territories  of  othftr  communi- 
ties on  invitation  (Meggitt,  1962,  chap.  5). 

Territorial  Boundaries 

Radcliffe-Brown  said  that  known  boundaries 
defined  each  patrician’s  territory,  on  which 
were  situated  its  totemic  sites.  Some  later  ob- 
servers have  reported  such  boundaries,  others 
have  described  them  as  uncertain  or  ill  de- 
fined, and  others  again  have  denied  their 
existence.  The  subject  is  important  mainly  in 
relation  to  Radcliffe-Brown’s  assertion  that  a 
patrician  exercised  an  exclusive  right  to  the 
natural  resources  of  its  territory.  In  tribes  like 
the  Walbiri  and  Gidjingali,  patricians  did  not 
claim  such  rights  and  accordingly  did  not 
establish  demarcations  around  their  totemic 
estates  for  the  purpose  of  controlling  access. 

I should  make  it  clear  that  I do  not  regard 
these  empirical  refutations  ofRadcliffe-Brown’s 
generalizations  as  somehow  adding  up  to  a new 
generalization.  In  view  of  the  wide  range  of 
ecological  variation  in  Australia,  it  seems  un- 
likely that  aboriginal  local  organization  con- 
formed to  a single  type,  though  now  it  is 


probably  too  late  to  establish  with  confidence 
the  main  varieties. 

To  anticipate  the  objection  that  Radcliffe- 
Brown  was  in  a better  position  than  later 
investigators  to  observe  the  real  thing,  I would 
remark  that  the  main  studies  of  local  organiza- 
tion in  Australia  have  been  carried  out  on  the 
frontier,  not  beyond  it,  and  that  Radcliffe- 
Brown’s  research  was  no  exception.  We  have 
all  faced  the  problem  of  reconstructing  a no- 
madic past  from  a mission-,  station-,  or  town- 
based  present.  Elsewhere  I have  suggested  that 
Radcliffe-Brown’s  “cell-like”  account  of  local 
organization  was  based  on  his  unverified 
assumption  that  an  acknowledged  ritual  re- 
lationship between  a patrician  and  its  estate 
implied  an  exclusive  economic  and  residential 
connection  as  well  (1962).  Here,  in  support  of 
the  kind  of  account  given  by  Meggitt  and 
myself,  1 mention  Elkin’s  view  (as  yet  un- 
published) that  the  congregation  of  aborigines 
around  European  settlements  was,  in  terms  of 
local  organization,  a change  not  of  kind  (as 
commonly  supposed)  but  of  degree.  At  least  in 
the  early  phase  of  contact  the  natives  regarded 
these  establishments  as  “super-water-holes.” 

Ethology  and  Primitive  Hunters 

Carpenter  wrote  that:  “It  wopld  seem  that 
possession  and  defense  of  territory  which  is 
found  so  widely  among  the  vertebrates,  in- 
cluding both  the  human  and  subhuman  pri- 
mates, may  be  a fundamental  biologic  need” 
(1941,  p.  158).  It  is  now  evident  that  there  are 
important  exceptions.  Schaller  (1965)  reports 
that  groups  of  mountain  gorillas  restricted  their 
activities  to  home  ranges,  but  these  areas  were 
not  exclusively  occupied  by  one  group.  He 
concludes:  “The  almost  complete  overlap  of 
some  ranges  and  observations  on  peaceful 
interactions  between  groups  indicate  that 
gorillas  have  no  territory  in  the  sense  of  an 
exclusive  area  defended  against  others  of  the 
same  species”  (p.  342).  Reynolds  and  Reynolds 
(1965)  state  that  chimpanzee  groups  in  the 
Budongo  Forest  were  constantly  changing 
membership,  splitting  apart,  meeting  others 
and  joining  them,  congregating,  or  dispersing. 
And  Goodall  (1965)  says  that  because  chim- 
panzee groups  in  the  Gombe  Stream  Reserve 


Hiatt  Ownership  and  Use  of  Land  among  the  Australian  Aborigines  ioi 


freely  united  from  time  to  time,  they  could  not 
be  divided  into  separate  communities.  Even 
baboon  territorial  organization  seems  less  rigid 
than  previously  supposed.  Whereas  Ardrey 
(1961,  p.  77)  spoke  of  the  troop  as  a society 
which  “demonstrates  all  those  hostile  traits 
normal  to  the  individual  territorial  pro- 
prietor,” DeVore  and  Hall  (1965)  in  a recent 
report  describe  cases  of  close  daily  contact 
between  different  baboon  groups  without 
displays  of  intergroup  aggression. 

Modern  ethology  thus  raises  no  difficulty 
for  an  account  of  aborigines  which  implies  that 
they  lacked  territorial  instincts.  Nevertheless, 
patricians  did  have  inalienable  rights  to  pieces 
of  land.  Given  the  evidence  that  they  did  not 
also  exercise  exclusive  rights  of  use  over  these 
properties,  it  seems  legitimate  to  ask  why  tribal 
areas  embraced  a number  of  separate  clan 
estates.  I shall  approach  the  problem  by 
selecting  a Gidjingali  patrician  as  an  example 
and  discussing  two  questions:  (1)  What  did  a 
clan  estate  look  like  to  its  owners?;  and  (2) 
What  did  it  feel  like? 

1.  The  Mararagidj  patrician  (which  I shall 
abbreviate  to  “Mara”)  in  i960  comprised 
25  members.  It  owned  seven  named  sites 
distributed  over  roughly  one  square  mile  of 
coastal  flat.  Five  sites  were  totemic  (several 
shell  middens  and  parts  of  a tidal  creek,  all 
connected  with  a mythological  Dingo),  two 
were  non-totemic  (a  mud  flat  formed  by  tidal 
inundation,  and  a place  called  “Where-the- 
plum-tree-died”).  Only  one  site  was  a camp- 
ing place. 

The  Mara  belonged  to  a community  of 
about  135  people  called  the  Anbara,  whose 
home  range  comprised  six  contiguous  estates 
owned  by  the  constituent  clans.  They  usually 
camped  together  at  one  or  other  of  two,  pos- 
sibly three,  places  suitable  for  a group  of  this 
size.  In  other  words,  the  local  community  con- 
sisted of  members  of  six  different  patricians, 
and  at  any  given  camp  the  majority  of  mem- 
bers were  living  outside  their  estates. 

The  men  fished  with  spears  along  the  coast 
and  tidal  creeks  and  also  hunted  land  animals, 
while  women  gathered  plant  foods  and  shell 
fish.  Men  often  built  fish  traps  across  creeks 
running  through  their  own  estates.  But  there 
were  no  restrictions  on  movement,  and  the 
camp  seems  to  have  been  a base  from  which 


people  might  range  anywhere  over  the  entire 
Anbara  region  (about  twenty  square  miles), 
returning  at  dusk  with  the  day’s  catch.  The 
Mara  estate  itself  did  not  have  a site  suitable 
for  such  a large  encampment,  but  from  time 
to  time  clan  members  temporarily  left  the  An- 
bara community  to  spend  a period  on  their 
homeland.  I should  add  that  folk  always  said 
they  had  been  born  on  their  estates,  though 
further  questioning  often  indicated  that  they 
were  not  certain. 

2.  Each  clan  owned  a number  of  designs 
representing  its  totemic  sites  and  the  mytho- 
logical creators  supposed  to  be  living  beneath 
or  near  them.  The  designs  were  used  in  initia- 
tion and  mortuary  rites,  which  were  not 
necessarily  held  on  the  clan’s  estate. 

It  is  thus  true  to  say  that  there  was  a ritual 
tie  between  a clan  and  its  estate.  But  there  was 
also  an  emotional  bond  with  the  land  itself 
that  seems  to  some  extent  independent  of 
mythological  associations.  Totems  were  re- 
garded with  awe  rather  than  affection,  and 
when  an  aborigine  spoke  lovingly  of  his  clan 
estate,  he  described  its  natural  features,  not  its 
supernatural  underworld. 

We  have  now  reached  the  core  of  the  prob- 
lem. Given  that  the  aboriginal  owners  of  a 
piece  of  land  were  not  solely  or  even  largely 
dependent  on  it  for  their  survival,  and  that 
they  often  spent  more  time  away  from  it  than 
on  it,  how  do  we  account  for  the  strength  of 
their  emotional  attachment?  I do  not  pretend 
to  know  the  answer.  The  only  relevant  facts  I 
can  bring  forward  are  that  members  of  a 
Gidjingali  clan  thought  of  their  estate  as  their 
birthplace  and  the  birthplace  of  their  fore- 
fathers (though  they  did  not  believe,  as  some 
other  tribes  did,  that  their  totemic  sites  were 
repositories  of  spirit-children) ; and  as  a home 
to  which  they  periodically  wished  to  return. 
The  evidence  is  clearly  against  the  existence  in 
aboriginal  clansmen  of  an  instinct  to  occupy 
and  defend  their  territory.  But  it  points  to  a 
strong  impulse  to  establish  and  maintain 
territorial  ownership. 

An  easier  question  to  answer  is  why 
Gidjingali  clans  did  not  confine  themselves 
to  their  estates.  There  are  clearly  adaptive  ad- 
vantages to  having  access  to  a broader 
subsistence  range.  Centripetal  forces  in  com- 
munities such  as  the  Anbara  included  desires 


102  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

for  variety  in  diet  and  human  company,  the 
safety  of  larger  numbers,  and  the  economic 
security  against  poor  seasons  afforded  by  a 
bigger  hunting  expanse.  The  operation  of  these 
forces  was  facilitated  by  an  ethic  of  generosity 
and  hospitality  which  defined  the  good  man  as 
the  generous  man.  But  the  persistence  of  small 


clan  estates  in  the  face  of  communities  of  clans 
and  communal  use  of  land  indicates  the  pres- 
ence of  a counterforce.  Ritual  responsibility 
was  undoubtedly  a factor,  but  another  com- 
ponent was  an  emotional  bond  with  the 
land  itself.  The  source  of  this  emotion  is  not 
clear. 


Stability  and  Flexibility 
in  Hadza  Residential  Groupings 


JAMES  WOODBURN 


In  another  paper  in  this  volume  (Chapter  5) 
I describe  how  the  Eastern  Hadza  obtain  their 
food  relatively  easily  by  hunting  and  gathering. 
Their  nutritional  needs  are  met  quickly  and 
without  much  effort,  coordination,  or  coopera- 
tion. 

In  this  paper  the  characteristics  of  Hadza 
residential  groupings  are  briefly  described. 
This  account  is  only  an  introduction;  a full 
description  with  the  necessary  supporting 
numerical  data  will  be  given  in  my  forth- 
coming monograph  on  the  Hadza. 

Hadza  residential  groupings  are  open, 
flexible,  and  highly  variable  in  composition. 
They  have  no  institutionalized  leadership  and, 
indeed,  no  corporate  identity.  They  do  not 
own  territory  and  clear-cut  jurally  defined 
modes  of  affiliation  of  individuals  to  residential 
groupings  do  not  exist.  The  use  of  the  term 
“band,”  with  its  connotations  of  territorial 
ownership,  leadership,  corporateness,  and 
fixed  membership  is  inappropriate  for  Hadza 
residential  entities  and  I prefer  to  use  the 
term  “camp,”  meaning  simply  the  set  of 
persons  who  happen  to  be  living  together  at 
one  place  at  one  time  (Woodburn,  1964). 

I consider  first  the  area  in  which  the  Hadza 
live  and  the  geographical  regions  into  which 
they  divide  it.  The  nature  of  the  camps,  their 
composition  and  their  flexibility  are  then 


examined.  Synchronic  and  diachronic  census 
material  is  presented  to  show  the  way  in  which 
groupings  change  through  time  and  to  demon- 
strate that  in  spite  of  their  flexibility  and 
variability,  important  underlying  regularities 
persist. 

The  principal  purpose  of  the  paper  is  simply 
descriptive,  but  my  intention  is  also  to  stress 
that  we  cannot  hope  to  understand  the  resi- 
dential arrangements  of  hunters  and  gatherers, 
especially  those  with  flexible  residential 
arrangements,  unless  we  make  use  of  numerical 
data,  in  particular  diachronic  numerical  data. 

The  Geographical  Divisions  of 
the  Country  of  the  Eastern  Hadza 

The  area  the  Eastern  Hadza  occupy  con- 
sisted in  the  recent  past  of  well  over  1,000 
square  miles  of  land.  Until  the  1930s  the  Hadza 
had  this  country  to  themselves,  but  then  two 
villages  of  outsiders  were  founded  at  fertile 
places  right  inside  Hadza  country  and  within 
a few  years  their  population  far  outnumbered 
that  of  the  Hadza.  At  the  same  time  there  has 
been  constant  loss  of  land  on  the  edge  of  their 
country  to  neighboring  tribes  and  more  es- 
pecially to  the  Iraqw.  But  the  serious  incur- 
sions are  all  relatively  recent  and  had  not  had 


104  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

any  effect  on  the  Hadza  system  of  land  tenure 
until  the  Hadza  were  settled  in  1964  and  1965. 

The  Hadza  commonly  use  certain  terms  to 
refer  to  regions  of  their  country  and  for  the 
people  associated  with  these  regions.  For  ex- 
ample, M angola  is  used  for  an  area  around  the 
Mangola  River.  This  area  cannot  be  precisely 
defined,  for  the  use  of  the  term  depends  partly 
on  context.  If  one  asks  a Hadza  living  far  from 
Mangola  about  the  whereabouts  of  some 
person  and  is  told  that  he  lives  at  Mangola,  this 
means  that  he  is  living  somewhere  within  an 
area  of  some  hundreds  of  square  miles  around 
the  Mangola  River.  On  the  other  hand,  if  one 
is  told  by  a man  living  only  five  miles  away 
from  the  Mangola  River  that  some  person  is 
living  at  Mangola,  this  normally  means  that 
the  person  is  living  within  a mile  or  two  of  the 
lower  reaches  of  the  river. 

The  word  Sipunga,  meaning  the  region 
around  Sipunga  Mountain,  has  similar  varia- 
tions in  meaning  according  to  context.  A third 
term  Tli'ika  (literally  “the  west”)  is  commonly 
used  to  refer  to  a stretch  of  high  ground  run- 
ning northeast  from  Isanzu  between  the  Yaida 
Valley  and  Lake  Eyasi  to  about  halfway  above 
the  lake  where  the  fourth  and  final  region, 
Hanlabi  (literally  “the  rocks”),  begins. 
Hanlabi,  which  is,  as  its  name  suggests,  a 
mountainous,  rocky  area,  extends  along  the 
same  ridge  between  Lake  Eyasi  and  the  Yaida 
plains  up  to  the  mountains  overlooking  the 
Mangola  River  which  are  generally  considered 
to  be  part  of  the  Mangola  region.  Unlike 
Mangola  and  Sipunga,  neither  Tli’ika  nor 
Hanlabi  have  a focal  point  in  a single  geo- 
graphical feature,  but  all  four  regions  resemble 
each  other  in  having  no  clearcut  boundary.  To 
draw  boundaries  would  be  quite  artificial;  the 
regions  grade  into  each  other.1 

On  the  other  hand,  no  part  of  the  country  in 
which  the  Hadza  live  to  the  east  of  Lake  Eyasi 
lies  outside  the  areas  to  which  these  terms  may 
be  applied  when  used  with  their  widest  con- 
notations. We  cannot  separate  them  off  from 
each  other,  but  between  them  they  cover  the 
whole  country.  Only  the  extensive  open  Yaida 
plains  are  outside  the  classification , but  this  is 
not  country  in  which  people  live.  Hadza  never 
live  in  the  open  plain,  but  only  in  the  bordering 
thickets  and  hills  which  fall  within  the  named 
areas. 


The  division  of  Hadza  country  into  four 
named,  roughly  defined  localities  bears  some 
relation  to  Hadza  social  arrangements.  At 
any  one  time  each  of  these  areas  is  likely  to 
contain  between  50  and  150  Hadza.  One  com- 
monly talks  of  the  Sipunganebe  (people  of 
Sipunga),  Mangolanebe  (people  of  Mangola), 
Tli'ikanebe  (people  of  the  west)  and  Hanlabi- 
cebe  (people  of  the  rocks) . These  names  do  not 
refer  to  a fixed  body  of  people  in  each  area  but 
simply  to  the  aggregate  of  individuals  who  at 
any  particular  time  or  in  any  particular  con- 
text are  associated  with  one  locality  rather 
than  another. 

Each  of  these  areas  contains  sufficient  sources 
of  food  and  water  to  maintain  its  inhabitants 
throughout  the  year  and  many  people,  es- 
pecially the  elderly,  restrict  their  nomadic 
movements  for  years  at  a stretch  largely  to  a 
single  one  of  these  four  areas.  At  the  peak  of 
the  dry  season,  when  water  is  scarce  and  when 
the  berries  of  Cordia  gharaf.  Ehrenb.  and  Salva- 
dora  persica  L.  ripen  in  huge  quantities  near  to 
these  few  sources  of  water,  the  majority  of  the 
inhabitants  in  each  of  these  areas  may  be 
found  concentrated  in  a few  large  camps 
within  perhaps  two  or  three  miles  or  less  of 
each  other  and  close  to  the  berries  and  water 
supplies  of  their  area.2  I have  never  heard  of 
any  occasion  on  which  all  the  inhabitants  of 
one  of  these  areas  joined  together  to  form  a 
single  camp,  although  their  mode  of  sub- 
sistence would  not  of  itself  make  this  impossible. 

In  one  of  the  four  areas,  Sipunga,  there  is  a 
marked  cleavage  into  two  divisions,  one  lying 
close  to  the  Sipunga  mountains  and  the  other 
centering  on  Yaida  River.  For  much  of  the 

1.  In  earlier  formulations  (Wood burn,  1962,  1964, 
and  the  conference  draft  of  this  paper)  I defined  only 
three  regions  and  omitted  Hanlabi.  Although  Mangola 
and  Tli’ika  could,  when  used  with  their  widest  possible 
connotations,  be  said  to  include  most,  if  not  all  of 
Hanlabi,  further  field  work  in  1967  has  convinced  me 
that  the  term  “Hanlabi”  is  used  sufficiently  often  to 
define  the  area  lying  in  the  southern  borderlands  of 
Mangola  and  the  northern  borderlands  of  Tli’ika  to 
demand  separate  consideration.  I hope  that  this  altera- 
tion may  help  to  stress  the  vagueness  and  the  lack  of 
precision  with  which  these  terms  are  used  by  the  Hadza. 

2.  In  Tli’ika,  and  especially  in  Hanlabi,  these  two 
popular  berries  are  less  numerous  and  less  concentrated 
than  in  Mangola  and  Sipunga  and  the  people  there 
usually  remain  more  dispersed  at  the  height  of  the  dry 
season. 


Woodburn  Stability  and  Flexibility  in  Hadza  Residential  Groupings 


year  the  camps  of  the  Yaida  division  are  far 
from  those  of  the  Sipunga  division,  but  at  the 
peak  of  the  dry  season  most  of  the  people  living 
near  Yaida  usually  come  to  live  in  camps  in 
close  association  with  the  camps  of  the  Sipunga 
division  among  the  berry  trees  under  Sipunga 
Mountain.  The  division  of  the  country  into 
four  areas  is  conspicuously  linked  with  the  fact 
that,  wherever  they  may  be  in  the  wet  season, 
camps  are  reasonably  clearly  grouped  into 
four  widely  separated  clusters  at  the  peak  of 
the  dry  season. 

People,  singly  and  in  groups,  move  freely 
from  region  to  region.  Any  individual  Hadza 
may  live,  hunt,  and  gather  anywhere  he  or  she 
likes  without  any  sort  of  restriction  and  without 
asking  permission  from  anyone.  Neither  indi- 
viduals nor  groups  hold  exclusive  rights  over 
natural  resources,  over  land  and  its  un- 
garnered produce,  and  there  is  never  any 
question  of  people  who  have  long  been  asso- 
ciated with  a particular  area  having  exclusive  or 
even  prior  rights  there.  Even  the  expansion  of 
neighboring  agricultural  and  pastoral  tribes 
into  Hadza  country  is  not  opposed,  and  each 
year  much  land  is  lost. 

The  inhabitants  at  any  particular  time  of 
each  of  these  regions  do  not  share  a joint  es- 
tate; nor  do  they  unite  to  perform  any  activity; 
nor  do  they  acknowledge  any  bond  uniting 
them  in  opposition  to  other  areas.  1’hey  cannot 
be  described  as  constituting  a group  and  to  use 
the  term  “band”  or  “horde”  to  describe  them 
would  be  completely  inappropriate. 

Camp  Size,  Composition 
and  Nomadic  Movement 

At  any  time,  the  400  or  so  Hadza  who  lead  a 
nomadic  hunting  and  gathering  life  to  the  east 
of  Lake  Eyasi  are  living  in  camps  containing 
very  varied  numbers  of  people — from  a single 
person  to  almost  a hundred  people.  The  aver- 
age camp  contains  about  eighteen  adults.  But 
the  members  of  a camp  do  not  constitute  a 
stable  unit,  either  in  place,  in  numbers,  or  in 
composition.  People  do  not  camp  continuously 
at  a particular  site  for  more  than  a few  weeks 
and  they  usually  move  much  more  often.  At 
the  time  members  of  a camp  all  move,  they 
may  go  together  to  a new  site;  they  may  split 


105 

up  and  form  camps  at  two  or  more  new  sites; 
they  may  go  as  a body  to  join  some  existing 
camp,  or  they  may  divide,  some  joining  an 
existing  camp  and  others  building  a camp  at  a 
new  site.  Even  while  people  are  living  together 
in  a camp  at  a particular  site,  the  composition 
of  the  camp  changes : some  people  move  in  and 
some  move  out.  In  spite  of  this  flexibility,  there 
are  interesting  consistencies  in  the  composition 
of  camps  which  will  be  described  later. 

The  individual  members  of  a camp  at  a 
particular  time  are  not  present  on  account  of 
their  common  attachment  to  a body  of  re- 
sources; nor  does  a camp  have  an  acknow- 
ledged leader  to  whom  common  allegiance  is 
owed.  A camp  at  any  particular  time  is  often 
known  by  the  name  of  a well-known  man 
living  in  it  at  that  time  (for  example,  /ets’a 
ma  Durugida — Durugida’s  camp).  But  this  indi- 
cates only  that  the  man  is  well  enough  known 
for  his  name  to  be  a useful  label,  and  not  that 
he  acts  either  as  a leader  or  as  a representative 
of  the  camp.  At  any  particular  time  a camp  is 
an  agglomeration  of  individual  members  tied 
to  each  other  by  a variety  of  kinship  and  affinal 
ties. 

In  my  doctoral  thesis  I use  data  derived  from 
two  censuses,  which  I describe  as  my  syn- 
chronic and  diachronic  censuses,  to  establish 
which  relationships  of  kinship  and  affinity  are 
important  in  residential  arrangements.  For  the 
synchronic  census,  I took  down  particulars  of 
the  membership  of  ten  camps  in  the  Sipunga 
and  Mangola  regions  in  June  and  July,  i960. 
1'hese  camps  contained  approximately  60  per 
cent  of  the  Eastern  Hadza.  The  diachronic 
census  consists  of  a record  of  the  changes  and 
consistencies  in  the  composition  of  a series  of 
camps.  Taking  one  particular  old  widow 
named  Bunga,  the  mother  of  two  married  sons 
and  two  married  daughters,  I recorded,  on  25 
separate  occasions  spread  over  more  than  three 
years,  the  people  who  were  living  in  the  same 
camp  as  she  was. 

Bunga  was,  in  the  estimation  of  the  Hadza,  a 
respectable  and  conventional  women  who  lived 
regularly,  by  Hadza  standards,  with  her  close 
kin  and  affines  and  who  moved  camp  less  fre- 
quently than  many  other  people,  especially 
younger  people.  On  all  25  occasions,  the  camps 
were  in  the  Sipunga  region.  The  particulars 
of  the  members  of  these  camps  tend  therefore 


106  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

to  stress  the  continuities  rather  than  the  dis- 
continuities in  Hadza  residential  groups.  Yet 
even  with  this  emphasis  on  continuity,  there 
were  radical  differences  in  the  size  and  com- 
position of  these  camps.  The  minimum  number 
of  adults  present  was  3 and  the  maximum  was 
37.  There  were  less  than  10  adults  present  on 
four  occasions,  between  10  and  19  adults 
present  on  twelve  occasions,  between  20  and 
29  adults  present  on  seven  occasions  and  be- 
tween 30  and  39  adults  present  on  the  remain- 
ing two  occasions.  A total  of  67  adults,  more 
than  a quarter  of  the  entire  Eastern  Hadza 
adult  population,  lived  with  Bunga  in  at  least 
one  of  these  camps.  The  Hadza  apply  the  word 
huyeti  (visitor)  freely  to  anyone  living  in  an  area 
ivi  which  he  does  not  normally  live  or  living 
with  people  with  whom  he  does  not  normally 
associate.  But  the  use  of  the  term  differs 
according  to  the  speaker  and  to  the  context, 
and  it  is  quite  impossible  to  divide  up  the 
members  of  a camp  into  those  that  are  residents 
and  those  that  are  huyeti.  However,  an  ex- 
amination of  the  diachronic  census  does  permit 
the  isolation  of  a set  of  people  who  were 
regularly  associated  through  time,  and  the 
nature  of  the  bonds  linking  these  persons  will 
be  mentioned  in  a later  section  of  this  paper. 

With  the  rich  food  resources  of  their 
country  and  their  knowledge  of  how  to  exploit 
these  resources,  it  may  seem  hard  to  under- 
stand why  the  Hadza  live  in  small,  unstable 
nomadic  groups  which  move  at  frequent  inter- 
vals and  constantly  change  in  size  and 
composition.  In  my  monograph  on  the  Hadza 
I shall  discuss  the  way  in  which  individuals 
and  groups  move  from  place  to  place  far  more 
frequently  than  is  strictly  necessary  if  move- 
ment is  seen  simply  as  a means  of  providing 
the  best  possible  access  to  supplies  of  food  and 
water.  We  ourselves  are  so  tied  down  by, 
among  other  things,  the  sheer  quantity  of  our 
possessions,  that  we  with  justification  regard  the 
movement  of  a household  from  one  place  to 
another  as  difficult  and  not  to  be  attempted 
without  substantial  reason.  But  we  must  be 
careful  not  to  allow  our  ethnocentrism  to  creep 
into  our  ethnography.  The  Hadza,  like  many 
other  nomadic  people,  value  movement  highly 
and  individuals  and  groups  move  to  satisfy  the 
slightest  whim.  Their  possessions  are  so  few  and 
are  so  easily  carried  that  movement  is  no  prob- 


lem. Indeed  people  often  find  it  easier  to  move 
to  the  place  where  a game  animal  has  been 
killed  than  to  carry  the  meat  back  to  their 
camp.  The  Hadza  may  move  camp  to  get 
away  from  a site  where  illness  has  broken  out, 
to  obtain  raw  materials — stone  for  smoking 
pipes,  wood  for  arrow  shafts,  poison  for  arrows, 
herbal  medicines  and  so  on,  to  trade,  to 
gamble  (see  Chapter  5,  this  volume),  to  allow 
the  realignment  of  the  huts  in  a camp  after 
changes  in  camp  composition,  to  segregate 
themselves  from  those  with  whom  they  are  in 
conflict,  and  for  many  other  reasons.  People  do 
often  move  primarily  because  food  and  water 
are  less  readily  available  than  they  would  like; 
and  even  where  some  other  motive  is  present, 
they  will  of  course  at  the  same  time  try  to 
improve  their  access  to  food  and  water.  How- 
ever, movement  normally  takes  place  long 
before  it  is  essential,  long  before  shortages  have 
become  in  any  way  serious. 

The  variations  in  the  size  and  in  the  com- 
position of  camps  again  cannot  be  interpreted 
in  simple  ecological  terms.  There  are  no 
grounds  for  suggesting  that  the  constant  and 
considerable  changes  in  camp  size  and  compo- 
sition neatly  parallel  similarly  frequent  and 
substantial  fluctuations  in  the  available  sources 
of  food  or  in  the  arrangements  used  to  procure 
food.  At  any  season  a wide  variety  of  sizes  of 
camp  is  ecologically  viable.  During  the  wet 
season,  camps  are,  on  average,  smaller  than 
in  the  dry  season,  but  not,  I think,  because  of 
any  important  difference  in  the  rigor  of  the 
environmental  pressures  in  the  two  seasons. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  single  factor  creat- 
ing the  larger  camps  of  the  dry  season  is  that 
at  this  time  of  the  year  more  large  game  is 
being  killed.  The  meat  of  a large  animal  is  by 
custom  widely  distributed  through  the  camp 
and  people  tend  to  congregate  in  camps  where 
there  are  skilled  and  successful  hunters.  The 
optimum  size,  considering  this  factor  alone, 
will  be  the  largest  number  of  persons  who  can 
share  an  average-sized  game  animal  and  feel 
that  they  have  had  an  acceptable  quantity  of 
meat.  In  the  wet  season,  when  few  large 
animals  are  killed,  there  is  less  incentive  for 
people  to  congregate  in  large  camps  and  the 
divisive  effects  of  quarrels  tend  to  keep  the  size 
of  the  camps  small.  The  general  emphasis  on 
seasonal  polarity,  mentioned  briefly  in  Chapter 


Woodburn  Stability  and  Flexibility  in  Hadza  Residential  Groupings 


5,  this  volume,  is  also  relevant.  Many  other 
factors,  some  ecological,  some  not,  affect  camp 
size,  but  cannot  be  discussed  here.  The  limits 
on  camp  size  set  by  the  availability  of  food  and 
water  and  the  techniques  used  to  obtain  them 
are  very  broad  and  permit  wide  fluctuations; 
wide  fluctuations  in  fact  occur. 

We  must  beware  of  any  tendency  to  treat 
fixed,  permanent  ties  linking  together  aggre- 
gates of  people  as  normal,  and  loose,  imperma- 
nent bonds  as  abnormal  and  requiring  special 
explanation.  Because  the  Hadza  do  not  join 
in  groups  to  assert  exclusive  rights  over  por- 
tions of  land,  or  other  property,  because  they 
do  not  unite  to  defend  either  resources  or  their 
own  persons,  because  they  cooperate  very  little 
with  each  other  in  their  subsistence  tasks, 
there  is  little  to  bind  individuals  to  specific 
other  individuals.  People  do  depend  on  obtain- 
ing meat  from  other  people,  but  they  are 
entitled  to  a share  of  meat  simply  by  being  in 
a particular  camp  at  a time  when  a large 
animal  is  killed  there  and  do  not  have  to  rely  on 
specific  categories  of  kin  or  other  specific  indi- 
viduals to  supply  them.  With  a few  important 
exceptions,  which  will  be  described  below, 
people  depend  simply  on  living  with  any  other 
Hadza  and  not  on  living  with  a particular  set 
of  people  standing  in  specific  relationships 
towards  them.  They  range  widely,  associating 
themselves  now  with  one  collection  of  people, 
now  with  another,  according  to  their  desires 
and  whims  of  the  moment. 


Regularities  in  Camp  Composition 

I cannot  here  give  much  of  the  detail  which  is 
set  put  at  length  in  my  doctoral  thesis  and 
which  will  be  published  in  my  forthcoming 
monograph  about  the  regularities  that  occur  in 
camp  composition.  But  the  more  important 
regularities  are  as  follows: 

Married  Couples 

The  Hadza  refer  to  any  man  and  woman  who 
cohabit  and  who  publicly  acknowledge  their 
cohabitation  as  being  husband  and  wife, 
whether  or  not  any  ceremony  of  marriage  had 
taken  place,  and  whether  or  not  the  man  and 
the  woman  accept  the  obligations  which  hus- 


I07 

bands  and  wives  normally  accept  towards  each 
other  and  each  other’s  kin.  This  is  not  to  say 
that  these  obligations  are  of  little  consequence: 
they  are,  in  fact,  exceedingly  important  and  a 
marriage  is  most  unlikely  to  last  unless  they  are 
accepted. 

Ceasing  to  live  together,  even  for  a matter  of 
a few  weeks,  puts  a marriage  in  jeopardy.  A 
husband  goes  away  on  a visit  to  some  other 
part  of  the  country  without  his  wife  at  his  peril. 
He  may  well  find  that  when  he  returns  she  has 
either  married  someone  else  or  that  she  has 
repudiated  him  by  putting  on  the  dress  of  an 
unmarried  girl  to  indicate  her  availability  for 
marriage.  People  who  are  stated  by  informants 
to  be  married  are  therefore  almost  always  co- 
resident with  their  spouses.  In  the  synchronic 
census  I encountered  115  spouses  of  mono- 
gamous marriages  and  of  these  1 12  were  living 
with  their  spouses.  The  remaining  three  were 
married  according  to  Hadza  informants;  that 
is,  informants  believed  that  the  separations 
were  temporary  and  that  the  couples  would 
resume  cohabitation.  All  three  of  the  marriages 
were,  however,  demonstrably  unstable.  Separa- 
tion, even  for  short  periods,  may  be  both  an 
indication  that  the  marriage  is  not  entirely 
successful  and  a contributory  factor  to  its 
eventual  breakdown.  At  the  same  time,  not  all 
separations  are  necessarily  either  symptomatic 
or  damaging;  spouses  of  successful  marriages 
do  occasionally  live  apart  for  a while,  but  they 
risk  their  marriages  by  doing  so. 

Compared  with  many  other  societies,  mar- 
riage is  relatively  unstable.  The  calculated 
divorce  rate3  is  49  per  i,oo«  years  of  marriage, 
though  this  is  only  a very  rough  approxima- 
tion. Few  figures  for  other  East  African  societies 
are  available  in  this  form.  The  Amba  have  a 
rate  of  31.5  (Winter,  1956,  p.  39)  but  no 
figures  are  available  for  tribes  near  to  the 
Hadza.  The  rate  for  England  and  Wales, 
!95°-52  was  2.8  and  for  the  United  States, 
1 949-5 1,  it  was  10.4  ( Demographic  Yearbook, 
1968). 

In  comparison  with  other  Hadza  relation- 
ships, the  noteworthy  aspect  of  the  marital 
relationship  is  not  its  instability,  but  on  the 
contrary  its  stability  and  strength.  A marriage  is 

3.  I am  using  the  term  “divorce”  loosely  to  refer  to 
separation  stated  by  the  Hadza  to  be  permanent. 


1 08  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

broken  by  divorce  on  average  only  about  once 
in  twenty  years  of  married  life.  In  general, 
most  Hadza  men  settle  down  and  live  for  many 
vears  with  a particular  wife;  to  sustain  the 
marriage  they  do  not  leave  her  for  long  on  her 
own  and  they  fulfill  onerous  obligations,  des- 
cribed below,  to  her  and  also  to  her  mother. 

Once  they  marry  for  the  first  time,  usually 
by  their  early  twenties,  very  few  men  live  for 
long  unmarried.  After  the  death  of  a wife  or 
permanent  separation  from  her,  the  husband 
will  soon  remarry.  In  the  ten  camps  of  the 
synchronic  census,  there  was  only  one  man 
who  had  previously  been  married  who  then 
lacked  a wife.  (On  the  other  hand  there  were 
thirteen  previously  married  women  who  at  the 
time  of  the  synchronic  census  were  unmarried. 
Of  these,  eight  were  past  the  menopause. 

A few  men  have  more  than  one  wife.  This 
complicates  their  residential  arrangements  and 
their  position  cannot  be  discussed  here. 

Parents  and  Children 

My  census  data  shows  that  children  whose 
parents  are  separated  almost  invariably  live 
with  their  mother.  In  adult  life  both  men  and 
women  often  live  with  their  parents,  but  the 
emphasis  is  on  residence  with  the  mother.  If 
the  parents  are  separated  or  the  mother  is  dead, 
it  is  unusual  to  find  a man  or  a woman  living 
in  the  same  camp  as  the  father. 

Both  husband  and  wife  value  co-residence 
with  their  mothers.  However,  residence  with 
the  wife’s  mother  is  considerably  more  fre- 
quent. Considering  only  monogamous  mar- 
riages in  which  the  spouses  were  living 
together,  there  were  in  the  synchronic  census 
28  husbands  and  34  wives  with  mothers  alive. 
Twelve  (that  is,  43  per  cent)  of  these  husbands 
and  23  (68  per  cent)  of  the  wives  were  living 
with  their  mothers.  But  the  emphasis  on  resi- 
dence with  the  wife’s  mother  is  greater  than 
might  appear  from  these  figures. 

Let  us  examine  the  residence  of  those  mono- 
gamous individuals  who  are  co-resident  with 
their  spouses  and  who  have  both  a living  mother 
and  a living  mother-in-law.  In  the  synchronic 
census  there  were  42  such  people  (that  is,  21 
couples) : 

15  couples  were  living  with  the  wife’s 
mother 


7 couples  were  living  with  the  husband’s 
mother 

4 couples  were  not  living  with  either 
mother 

But  five  of  these  couples  were  living  in  camps 
containing  both  mother  and  mother-in-law. 
From  these  five  cases,  no  indication  can  be 
gained  of  any  difference  between  the  attrac- 
tion of  living  with  the  wife’s  mother  and  the 
attraction  of  living  with  the  husband’s  mother. 
If  these  cases  are  omitted,  the  figures  are  as 
follows: 

10  couples  were  living  with  the  wife’s 
mother  alone 

2 couples  were  living  with  the  husband’s 
mother  alone 

4 couples  were  not  living  with  either 
mother 

In  other  words  the  monogamous  couples  of 
the  synchronic  census  who  were  faced  with  a 
choice  between  living  with  the  husband’s 
mother  and  living  with  the  wife’s  mother,  had 
exercised  their  choice  in  favor  of  the  wife’s 
mother  five  times  as  often  as  in  favor  of  the 
husband’s  mother.4 

A high  valuation  is  placed  on  residence  with 
the  mothers  of  husband  and  wife,  yet  four 
couples  were  found  living  in  camps  in  which 
neither  mother  was  present.  As  it  happens,  in 
each  of  these  four  cases,  there  are  unusual 
circumstances’  and  in  quite  a high  proportion 
of  cases  observed  at  other  times  in  which  a 
couple  is  living  away  from  both  mothers,  there 
is  an  obvious  reason  to  account  for  their 
behavior. 

The  diachronic  census  data  support  the 
findings  from  the  synchronic  census  and  allow 
the  matter  to  be  taken  an  important  step 
further.  It  enables  us  to  see  whether  decisions 
about  which  mother  to  live  with  are  lasting.  In 
my  diachronic  census,  only  one  couple  among 
those  with  both  mothers  alive  who  lived  for  a 
time  with  the  husband’s  mother  did  not  at 

4.  Taken  alone,  these  figures  are  so  small  as  to  be 
worth  very  little.  I quote  them  here  because  they  are 
consistent  with  observations  and  figures  collected  at 
other  times  and  because  they  illustrate,  I think,  the  sort 
of  data  on  residence  which  we  need  (in  a more  detailed 
form)  if  we  are  to  compare  the  residential  arrangements 
of  hunters  and  gatherers. 

5.  The  circumstances  are  described  in  Woodburn, 
i964,  PP-  '42-44- 


Woodburn  Stability  and  Flexibility  in  Hadza  Residential  Groupings 


109 


some  other  period  live  with  the  wife’s  mother. 
In  this  one  case  the  wife’s  mother  was  living  not 
among  the  Hadza  but  with  a neighboring  tribe. 

Marriage  involves  an  obligation,  and  one 
which  is  observed,  to  live  with  the  wife’s 
mother  and,  except  in  special  circumstances, 
the  only  time  a couple  with  both  mothers  alive 
will  live  for  long  away  from  the  wife’s  mother 
is  when  they  are  living  with  the  husband’s 
mother.  For  a marriage  to  survive,  a husband 
must  live  regularly  not  merely  with  his  wife  but 
also  in  the  same  camp  as  her  mother.  If  his  own 
mother  is  alive  he  and  his  wife  will  usually  (but 
not  always)  visit  her  from  time  to  time.  There 
is  no  question  of  any  obligation  to  live  with  her. 

A man  has  important  property  obligations 
toward  his  wife  and  his  mother-in-law.  Long 
strings  of  bridewealth  beads  should  be,  and 
usually  are,  given  by  the  bridegroom  to  his 
parents-in-law.  They  are  taken  and  worn  by 
the  mother-in-law  around  her  waist.  There- 
after, throughout  his  life  of  the  marriage,  the 
husband  should  keep  his  wife  and  mother-in- 
law  supplied  with  meat  and  with  trade  goods. 
Almost  all  trade  is  carried  on  by  men;  women 
rely  mainly  for  access  to  these  goods  not  on 
their  own  kin  but  on  their  husbands  and 
sons-in-law.  Beads,  tobacco,  and  cloth  are 
especially  keenly  desired  and  demanded. 
Husbands  cannot  afford  to  fail  too  often  if  they 
wish  to  preserve  their  marriages. 

The  pattern  of  dyadic  ties  that  I have  des- 
cribed links  persons  into  a grouping  which  has 
the  same  genealogical  composition  as  a matri- 
lineal  or  matrilocal  extended  family,  that  is  a 
woman  and  her  married  daughter  (or  daugh- 
ters), together  with  their  husbands,  and  their 
unmarried  offspring  of  both  sexes.  In  a few 
cases  in  which  women  have  survived  to  a great 
age,  the  grouping  will  contain  three  genera- 
tions of  married  women:  the  apical  woman 
will  have  both  married  daughter(s)  and  mar- 
ried granddaughter(s)  in  her  grouping.  These 
groupings  are  not  joint  or  extended  families 
since  they  are  not  corporate  groups  and  do  not 
have  a recognized  head.6  I prefer  to  use  a 
neutral  term  and  to  refer  to  them  as  “simple 
residential  units.” 

6.  Cf.  Richards  (1950,  p.  210),  Murdock  (1949, 
p.  33  f.),  and  Note 5 and  Queries  in  Anthropology  (1951, 
p.  72). 


By  stating  that  a simple  residential  unit  has 
no  recognized  head,  I mean  that  there  is  no 
institutionalized  position  of  head  of  the  unit,  no 
person  who  exercises  authority  over  other 
members  of  the  unit  whether  by  virtue  of  his  or 
her  genealogical  position  or  by  any  other 
qualification.  In  some  units  one  or  more  indi- 
viduals may  stand  out  as  influential  persons, 
but  in  other  units  this  is  not  the  case.  However, 
the  unit  does  have  a genealogical  focus  in  the 
person  of  the  apical  women.  We  might,  there- 
fore, describe  the  units  as  matrifocal,  but  even 
this  is,  in  some  cases  and  contexts,  misleading. 
Sometimes,  especially  if  the  wife’s  mother  is  old 
or  of  weak  character,  has  no  husband,  and  has 
only  one  married  daughter,  it  can  be  seen  that 
the  mother  is  aligning  herself  residentially  with 
her  married  daughter  and  her  son-in-law, 
rather  than  they  with  her.  But  usually  it  is  the 
mother  who,  more  than  any  other  person, 
serves  as  the  genealogical  focus  around  which 
a simple  residential  unit  clusters.  At  any  par- 
ticular time  a camp  will  usually  contain  one  or 
more  simple  residential  units  together  with  a 
very  few  people  who  are  not  members  of  these 
units.  When  two  or  more  units  are  present  in 
a single  camp,  they  may  be  linked  by  kinship 
and  affinal  ties  or  they  may  not.  If  no  tie  links 
them,  they  are  most  unlikely  to  stay  together 
long.  Units  which  are  regularly  residentially 
associated  are  usually  bound  together  by  a 
number  of  close  kinship  or  affinal  ties.  Not 
even  the  more  important  ties  linking  together 
units — such  as  the  tie  between  a woman  and 
her  married  son  or  the  tie  between  a pair  of 
siblings — are  very  highly  valued  or  involve 
significant  property  obligations.  The  kinship 
and  affinal  ties  of  the  apical  woman  are  tem- 
porally prior  to  those  of  the  junior  members 
of  the  unit  and  they  tend  to  be  more  often  used 
in  establishing  links  between  the  component 
units  of  the  camp. 

Conclusion 

The  flexibility  and  variability  of  Hadza  resi- 
dential arrangements  are  fundamental;  the 
regularities  within  the  flux  that  is  Hadza 
society  emerge  clearly  only  from  an  examina- 
tion of  residential  arrangements  through  time. 
Such  regularities  as  do  exist  are  linked  with 


no  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

the  continuing  property  obligations  of  certain 
pairs  of  persons  to  each  other,  above  all  hus- 
band and  wife,  and  mother-in-law  and  son-in- 
law.  In  Hadza  society,  individuals  are  bound 
to  each  other  by  dyadic  property  ties  between 
relatively  few  categories  of  persons,  and  the 
type  of  unit  that  is  a simple  product  of  these 
ties  must  be  distinguished  from  the  corporate 
domestic  and  other  groups,  whose  members 
cooperate,  possess  important  joint  interests, 
and  accept  authority  within  the  group, 
which  are  characteristic  of  most  small-scale 
societies. 

The  highly  flexible  social  arrangements  of 
the  Hadza  are  by  no  means  unique  among 
hunters  and  gatherers.  At  this  symposium, 
data  has  been  presented  on  a number  of 
peoples  whose  residential  arrangements  show 


some  striking  similarities  to  the  Hadza.  For 
instance,  the  IKung  Bushmen,  the  Mbuti,  the 
Ik,  the  Dogrib,  the  Netsilik  Eskimos,  and  even 
the  Gidjingali  of  northern  Australia  all  live  in 
groupings  that  change  frequently  in  size  and 
composition. 

The  widespread  occurrence  of  this  flexibility 
brings  us  back  to  the  problem  of  field  method. 
The  analysis  of  group  structure  is  a crucial 
area  of  research,  and,  if  comparative  studies 
are  to  be  of  any  value,  it  is  essential  that  the 
field  workers  concerned  develop  a common 
body  of  techniques.  One  of  the  most  impor- 
tant results  to  come  out  of  the  symposium  on 
Man  the  Hunter  may  be  the  development  of 
measures  of  general  use  for  describing  and 
analyzing  the  open  and  fluid  social  groups  of 
hunting  and  gathering  peoples. 


12. 


The  Diversity  of  Eskimo  Societies 


DAVID  DAMAS 


Survey  of  Eskimo  Societies 

It  is  not  necessary  for  the  student  of  hunting 
societies  to  extend  his  survey  further  than  the 
Eskimo  area  to  gain  an  appreciation  of  their 
diversity.1  The  large  permanent  villages  of  the 
North  Alaskan  and  Bering  Sea  whale  hunters 
and  the  fragmented  mobile  groups  of  the  Cari- 
bou Eskimo  represent  extremes  of  settlement 
and  community  types  occurring  within  an  area 
of  considerable  cultural  and  linguistic  uni- 
formity (Fig.  i). 

Two  important  characteristics  of  social 
groups  are  the  size  and  the  duration  of  aggre- 
gates. Aggregations  exceeding  50  and  often 
100  persons  formed  at  one  time  or  other  during 
the  year  in  almost  all  Eskimo  regions.  The 
maximal  aggregates  of  the  Caribou  Eskimo 
which  occurred  at  caribou  drives  appear  to 
have  been  smaller  units  (Birket-Smith,  1929, 
p.  74).  Spencer  (1959,  p.  132)  feels  that  cari- 
bou drives  of  the  similarly  adapted  Nunamiut 
attracted  as  many  as  200  or  300  individuals, 
but  Gubser  (1965,  p.  167)  thinks  that  50  to  150 

1.  The  time  level  used  in  this  paper  is  “aboriginal” 
since  it  refers  to  the  earliest  accounts  or  to  reconstruc- 
tions made  by  ethnographers  (including  the  author’s). 
My  statements  regarding  Netsilik,  Copper,  and  Iglulik 
Eskimo  also  rely  heavily  on  data  from  societies  contem- 
porary with  the  Fifth  Thule  Expedition  of  1921-24. 
These  represent  basically  aboriginal  groups  in  most 
important  features  of  social  organization  (Damas, 
1969)- 


was  the  usual  range.  These  short-lived  aggre- 
gates generally  lasted  only  a few  weeks.  The 
snowhouse  encampments  of  most  Central  Eski- 
mo groups  appear  to  have  often  included  more 
than  100  persons  and  at  times  as  many  as  200 
(Boas,  1888,  p.  425)  for  a usual  duration  of  two 
to  four  months. 

Considerable  variation  can  be  noted  in  the 
duration  of  occupancy  and  the  size  of  villages 
composed  of  permanent  structures  (cf.  Wata- 
nabe,  this  volume).  The  North  Alaskan  villages 
of  up  to  300  inhabitants  (R.  Spencer,  1959; 
Van  Stone,  1962)  were  occupied  for  about  ten 
months  of  the  year,  with  some  individuals  re- 
maining at  the  sites  during  the  entire  year. 
Villages  of  the  stone  and  sod  house  dwelling 
Polar  Eskimo  (Ekblaw,  1948),  Coast  of  Labra- 
dor Eskimo  (G.  J.  Taylor,  1965),  and  East 
Greenlanders  (Holm,  1914;  Thalbitzer,  1914) 
generally  averaged  fewer  than  fifty  inhabi- 
tants and  were  occupied  for  four  to  seven 
months.  In  these  cases  the  Eskimo  merged  into 
larger  groups  at  some  time  during  the  year’s 
cycle.  Economic,  social,  and  ceremonial  mo- 
tives were  probably  all  involved  in  this 
tendency  to  aggregate. 

Kinship  plays  an  important  role  in  Eskimo 
social  organization,  just  as  it  does  in  the 
organization  of  other  hunting  groups.  Central 
Eskimo  groupings  reveal  extensive  linking 
of  overlapping  kindreds  (Damas,  1969  ). 

In  the  absence  of  adequate  data  from  other 


1 1 1 


1 12  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

regions,  continuity  of  kinship  ties  within  most 
local  groups  might  be  expected  to  exist  in  con- 
sistency with  the  apparent  general  absence  of 
rules  of  local  exogamy.  Matri-patrilocal  resi- 
dence has  been  reported  for  the  Nunivak 
Eskimo  (Lantis,  1946)  and  St.  Lawrence  Eski- 
mo (Hughes,  i960)  while  matrilocality  is  attri- 
buted to  the  Nunamiut  (Pospisil,  1964)  and 
neolocality  to  the  Copper  Eskimo  (Jenness, 


in  the  case  of  the  Eskimo  of  the  Coast  of  Labra- 
dor, the  polygamous  joint  family  (G.  J.  Taylor, 
1965).  Throughout  the  Eskimo  area  spouse  ex- 
change and  adoption  provided  a growing  edge 
to  the  network  of  kinship. 

Other  structural  features  were  peripheral 
to  or  independent  from  kinship.  In  North 
Alaska  (R.  Spencer,  1959)  and  in  the  Mac- 
Kenzie  delta  (Stefansson,  1914)  the  voluntary 


6 North  Alaska  13  Labrador 

7 Mackenzie  14  Coast  of  Labrador 

15  Polar 

16  West  Greenland 

17  East  Greenland 

Figure  i.  Distribution  of  Eskimo  Societies. 


1922).  Patrilineages  occur  in  the  Bering  Sea 
region  (Hughes,  i960;  Lantis,  1946)  and  the 
patrilineal  principle  is  projected  to  the  clan 
level  on  St.  Lawrence  Island  and  among  the 
Siberian  Eskimo  (Menovshchikov,  1964; 
Hughes,  1965).  Elsewhere  the  chief  kinship 
based  segments  within  the  community  were 
the  nuclear  family,  which  seldom  operated  as 
an  independent  unit,  the  extended  family,  and 


units  of  the  whaling  crew  and  the  karigi  or 
associated  men’s  house  segmented  the  com- 
munities. The  karigi  existed  without  association 
with  boat  crews  on  Nunivak  (Lantis,  1946), 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  boat  crew  was 
organized  according  to  lineages  on  St.  Law- 
rence Island  (Hughes,  i960)  and  among  the 
Siberian  Eskimo  (Menovshchikov,  1964). 
Whaling  crews  were  recruited  from  the 


members  of  adjacent  villages  in  the  case  of 
the  Chugach  Eskimo  (Birket-Smith,  1953). 

Partnerships  of  various  sorts  were  important 
social  features  in  much  of  the  Eskimo  area. 
Trading  partnerships  crossed  the  ecological 
boundary  between  coastal  and  inland  groups 
in  North  Alaska  (R.  Spencer,  1959).  Seal  shar- 
ing practices  provided  essential  elements  to 
Netsilik  (Balikci,  1964,  pp.  36-37;  Van  de 
Velde,  1956),  and  Copper  Eskimo  (Damas, 
in  press  ) social  structures.  Partnerships  in 
dancing  were  also  prominent  in  Central 
Eskimo  society  (Damas,  in  press  ). 

Whatever  the  chief  segments  or  sorts  of  re- 
lationships that  may  have  existed  within  Eski- 
mo local  groups,  they  were  always  identified 
by  name  with  a territory.  The  postbase  -miut 
or  -meit  together  with  a base  which  indicated 
a region,  was  a designation  applied  to  major 
and  minor  local  groupings  among  the  more 
nomadic  Eskimo  as  well  as  to  permanent  vil- 
lages. This  identification  with  territory  seldom, 
if  ever,  implied  a defense  of  hunting  area. 

Three  Central  Eskimo  Societies 

Table  1 has  been  included  in  order  to  make 
possible  more  detailed  comparison  with  other 
hunting  societies.  It  covers  the  general  social 
and  economic  features  of  three  major  Eskimo 
groups  studied  by  the  writer.2  Each  of  the 
groups  represented  genealogical  bodies  with 
extensive  linkage  within  and  sharp  separation 
from  each  of  the  others.  These  factors  together 
with  differences  in  dialect  and  culture  justify 
separation  of  the  groups  for  purposes  of 
analysis.  The  term  “tribe”  has  been  usefully 
applied  (Helm,  1965a,  p.  384)  to  such  entities 
without  implying  political  aspects  of  the  term. 

Aboriginally  the  450  to  500  Netsilik  (Boas, 
1888,  p.  454;  Damas,  1969  ),  500  to  550 
Iglulik  (Damas,  1963,  p.  23;  Manning,  1943, 
p.  103)  and  800  Copper  Eskimo  (Jenness,  1922, 
p.  42;  Rasmussen,  1923,  p.  70)  were  divided 
into  groups  averaging  100  members  who  lived 
part  of  each  winter  in  villages  established  on 
the  sea  ice.  These  were  the  largest  yearly 
aggregates  and  appear  to  have  been  strongly 

2.  Field  work  was  carried  out  in  the  Iglulik  Eskimo 
area  in  1960-61,  in  the  Copper  Eskimo  area  in  1962-63, 
and  in  the  Netsilik  Eskimo  area  in  1965. 


Damas  The  Diversity  of  Eskimo  Societies  1 1 3 

associated  with  the  ecology  of  the  ringed  seal. 
However,  ceremonial  and  social  motives  for  as- 
semblage probably  were  also  important. 

Fluidity  in  membership  occured  among  the 
groups  of  each  tribal  region  but  the  winter 
aggregations  pf  two  successive  years  were  com- 
prised of  a stable  core  of  60  to  70  per  cent  of 
the  members.  I have  indicated  (Damas, 
1969  ) that  the  hunting  groups  that  merged 
in  such  winter  camps  formed  the  “band”  and 
that  the  aggregation  itself  was  the  “band  as- 
semblage.” These  designations  seem  consistent 
with  accepted  ethnological  usage.  It  would 
probably  weaken  the  typological  value  of  the 
band  concept  to  extend  its  application  to  large 
permanent  settlements  like  those  found  in  West 
Greenland  or  the  Alaskan  and  Bering  Sea 
areas. 

The  seasonal  economic  cycles  of  the  Copper 
and  Netsilik  Eskimo  were  identical  in  main 
features  (see  Table  1).  The  Iglulik  Eskimo 
cycle  differed  in  that  there  was  greater  empha- 
sis on  sea  mammal  hunting  and  less  on  fishing. 

Band  composition  appears  to  have  been  uni- 
form in  the  three  regions.  Table  1 refers  to 
composition  as  “bilateral  with  prominence  of 
male  relevant  ties.”  This  generalization  has 
been  abstracted  from  charts  of  primary  kin  ties 
based  on  censuses  of  the  Fifth  Thule  Expedi- 
tion of  1921-24  (Mathiassen,  1928;  Rasmus- 
sen, 1931,  1932).  These  charts  reveal  the  pre- 
dominance of  male-male  primary  kin  ties  over 
female-male  or  female-female  ties.  Enough  of 
of  the  latter  two  types  of  links  occur  to  inject 
considerable  bilaterality  into  the  genealogical 
shape  of  the  band  (Damas,  1969  ). 

Criteria  for  family  type  used  in  the  table  are 
those  of  residential  arrangement  and  minimal 
sharing  units.  Among  the  Netsilik  and  Iglulik 
tribes  the  families  are  characterized  as  “viri- 
oriented  extended.”  These  groups  occupied 
multi-family  dwelling  or  compounds  of  single 
dwellings.  They  were  indivisible  sharing  units. 
Usually  one  or  more  of  the  nuclear  family 
heads  in  these  units  was  attached  uxorilocally. 
Factors  of  population  structure,  especially 
isolation  through  death  of  agnates,  and  bride 
service  appear  to  account  for  such  cases 
(Damas,  1963).  The  Copper  Eskimo  are  one  of 
the  few  Eskimo  groups  whose  family  structure 
exemplifies  the  nuclearity  usually  represented 
for  the  Eskimo  in  interpretive  writing  (Linton, 


Table  1 Central  Eskimo  Social  and  Economic  Features 


1 14  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 


o a 

M l 1 I 

•§  1 jj  g>  ■§ 

be  > ^ rt 

•S  Jj  bfi  8 3 

■S  •-  .s  » £ 

$ c % 

oj  ■ -«  c a 1- 

fflhiSu 


o 


£ - 

0 £ v> 
u o C 

jd  3 

13  "3.  J* 

:§  g>f 

^ *5  J3 

_ > CA 

V (-G 

— 1 C/5  ^ 

‘ 3 c/T 

1 rt  > 

e -c 
■8  .£  ^ 
c ° I 

8 


1 1 I III 

I ^ 2 'G' 


•§  1 1 


« - « 
i>  u a, 


W ’ C/5  bo 
^ O c 

rs  cu  *_i 

E E S 

cd  o ^ 

u.  u K 


Commensal  Units  Village-wide  communal  eating  (1)  Men  of  extended  family  Variable — (1)  Individual 

(2)  Women  of  extended  family  (2)  Nuclear  family 

(3)  Extended  family 


1936,  p.  163;  Murdock,  1949,  p.  227;  Service, 
1962,  p.  99). 

The  structure  of  the  family  is  reflected  in  the 
makeup  of  the  hunting  groups  which  com- 
prised the  chief  local  groupings  during  a large 
part  of  the  year’s  cycle.  In  the  spring  the 
Iglulik  and  Netsilik  winter  band  aggregates 
split  into  extended  family  clusters  averaging 
perhaps  fifteen  to  twenty  persons  each.  The 
Iglulik  split  further  during  part  of  the  summer 
when  the  younger  men  roamed  inland  after 
caribou  while  pairs  of  older  men  hunted  from 
kayaks  in  the  sea.  The  nucleation  of  the  Copper 
Eskimo  family  was  expressed  in  the  irregular 
composition  of  summer  hunting  groups.  Lack- 
ing the  high  degree  of  cohesiveness  of  extended 
family  structure  found  in  the  other  two  regions, 
the  Copper  Eskimo  hunting  groups  were  made 
up  either  of  a core  of  siblings,  or  of  spouse 
exchange  partners,  or  of  actually  unrelated  or 
distantly  related  persons.  In  all  three  areas 
aggregations  of  an  intermediate  size  in  relation 
to  the  winter  sealing  village  and  summer  hunt- 
ing groups  gathered  for  short  periods  at  the 
sites  of  caribou  drives  or  fish  runs. 

The  diversity  in  the  organization  of  hunting 
groups  is  apparent  in  the  other  features  shown 
in  the  table : leadership,  sharing  practices,  and 
commensal  units. 

Leadership  was  weakly  developed  among  the 
Copper  Eskimo  and  personal  qualities  alone 
appear  to  have  been  responsible  for  whatever 
authority  certain  individuals  enjoyed.  The 
Netsilik  extended  family  was  headed  by  the 
oldest  male  member,  the  ihumataq,  but  there 
appears  to  have  been  no  overall  band  leader. 
This  family  leadership  pattern  was  extended  to 
cover  the  entire  band  in  the  Iglulik  Eskimo 
region.  The  band  isumataq  was  usually  the  head 
of  the  largest  extended  family  unit  in  that  area 
(Damas,  1963). 

Sharing  practices  and  commensal  practices 
together  formed  complementary  systems  of 
distributing  the  catch  in  each  area.  Among  the 
Copper  Eskimo,  individual  nuclear  family 
heads  formed  partnerships  which  determined 
the  sharing  of  specific  parts  of  the  seal.  The 
network  of  distribution  was  extended  in  the 
area  of  consumption  by  the  practice  of  com- 
munal eating  on  a village-wide  basis.  In  the 
Netsilik  region,  seal-sharing  partnerships  also 
existed  between  individuals,  but  the  meat 


Damas  The  Diversity  of  Eskimo  Societies  1 1 5 

thereby  acquired  became  the  property  of  the 
extended  family.  The  two  commensal  units, 
the  men  and  the  women,  ate  separately  in  ad- 
joining domes  of  the  family’s  snowhouse  com- 
pound. The  catch  of  the  Iglulik  Eskimo  was 
distributed  by  the  band  isumataq  among  the 
lesser  isumatat.  Their  commensal  units  were 
variable  and  based  on  expediency.  Sometimes 
the  returning  hunter  ate  alone;  other  meals 
were  restricted  to  the  nuclear  family,  and  some 
were  shared  by  the  entire  extended  family. 

The  character  and  magnitude  of  variation 
within  these  three  regions  may  not  seem  signi- 
ficant when  viewed  in  worldwide  perspective, 
but  certainly  they  are  important  enough  to 
require  explanation. 

There  is  an  apparent  integration  or  co- 
ordination of  social  features  that  can  support 
the  contention  that  the  three  societies  were 
balanced,  internally  consistent  units.  The 
nucleation  of  Copper  Eskimo  families  is  com- 
pensated for  in  economic  matters  by  highly 
structured  sharing  and  communal  eating.  The 
need  for  communal  eating  appears  less  urgent 
among  the  Netsilik  since  the  extended  family 
acts  as  a pool  for  resources.  Partnerships  in 
sharing  appear  to  be  largely  unnecessary 
among  the  Iglulik  since  the  distribution  of  food 
among  extended  families  throughout  the  band 
was  provided  for  by  the  band  isumataq. 

Looking  beyond  the  internal  arrangement  of 
these  social  and  economic  features  to  external 
explanations,  an  examination  of  the  table  lends 
little  support  to  facile  correlations.  If  one  as- 
sumes that  the  chief  source  of  regional  variation 
of  societies  will  be  ultimately  related  to  varia- 
tions in  ecology,  two  hypotheses  could  be 
posited  for  the  Central  Eskimo  regions  dis- 
cussed here:  (1)  Uniformity  of  resources  and 
exploitative  patterns  in  the  three  regions  are  so 
similar  that  one  would  expect  great  similarity 
in  social  features.  I have  argued  against  such 
social  uniformity.  (2)  Similarity  in  the  eco- 
nomic life  of  the  Copper  Eskimo  and  Netsilik 
in  contrast  to  the  somewhat  divergent  economy 
of  the  Iglulik  Eskimo  should  be  reflected  in 
social  features.  This  correlation  cannot  be 
strongly  supported  by  the  table. 

While  a closer  examination  of  ecological 
factors  may  reveal  correlations  with  social 
structure,  in  the  opinion  of  the  writer  that  ap- 
proach will  fall  far  short  of  total  explanation  of 


1 1 6 Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

regional  variations  in  the  Central  Arctic.  His- 
torical factors  of  common  heritage,  diffusion, 
and  cultural  drift  will  have  to  be  considered  in 
this  context. 

This  summary  of  some  of  the  important 
social  features  in  three  Central  Eskimo  regions 
indicates  that,  in  addition  to  the  general  di- 
versity found  among  the  major  Eskimo  areas, 
variability  in  patterns  of  community  organiza- 
tion occurs  within  an  area  exhibiting  highly 
similar  or  even  identical  patterns  in  the 
dispersal  of  people. 

Variability  provides  the  raw  material  for 
studies  of  “concomitant  variation”  (Nadel, 
1951)  or  “controlled  comparison”  (Eggan, 
1954),  approaches  which  will  be  rewarding  if 
applied  in  the  Eskimo  area.  This  discussion  of 
three  Eskimo  groups  is  only  a beginning  to 
more  detailed  comparative  studies.  To  extend 
useful  comparative  studies  throughout  the  en- 
tire Eskimo  area  requires  more  detailed  in- 
formation about  a number  of  groups  than  is 
available  at  present.  However,  even  such  a 
casual  review  of  social  diversity  as  I have  given 
suggests  further  channels  for  enlarging  the 
understanding  of  hunting  societies  in  general. 

Relationship  to  Other 
Studies  of  Hunting  Societies 

As  indicated  above,  the  concept  of  the  band 
does  not  seem  to  be  applicable  in  all  Eskimo 
regions.  Certainly  within  the  realm  of  hunting 
societies  there  are  peoples  similar  in  their 
sedentary  existence  to  the  North  Alaskan  or 
Bering  Sea  Eskimo  who  fall  outside  the  scope 
of  a useful  application  of  “band.”  Even  if  one 
restricts  comparison  to  nomadic  groups,  diffi- 
culties arise  in  the  use  of  the  term  “band.” 
During  a recent  conference  on  band  organiza- 
tion3 it  was  found  that  the  term  “band”  had 

3.  The  Conference  on  Band  Organization  sponsored 
by  the  National  Museum  of  Canada  held  in  Ottawa, 
Ontario,  August  30  to  September  2,  1965,  dealt  with  a 
number  of  problems  that  are  relevant  to  studies  of  the 
social  organization  of  hunting  societies.  The  proceedings 
of  that  conference  will  be  published  in  the  National 
Museum  of  Canada  Bulletin  Series.  A more  complete 
analysis  of  the  band  composition  of  the  Central  Eskimo 
together  with  implications  for  the  study  of  band  societies 
will  be  found  in  the  paper  “Characteristics  of  Central 
Eskimo  Band  Structure”  (Damas,  1969)  which  is 
included  in  the  proceedings  of  the  band  conference. 


been  applied  to  such  widely  variant  groups  as 
the  Birhor  of  India  with  average  size  groups  of 
25  and  the  Peel  River  Kutchin  group  of  300  to 
400  members.  In  trying  to  establish  common 
criteria  for  usage,  it  was  generally  agreed  that 
two  major  types  of  units  could  be  subsumed 
under  “band,”  those  that  aggregated  at  some 
point  in  the  year’s  cycle  and  those  that  com- 
prised only  a conceptual  unity. 

A number  of  other  factors  which  complicate 
attempts  to  isolate  the  band  in  nomadic  hunt- 
ing societies  were  also  revealed  during  that 
conference.  A careful  examination  of  a larger 
sample  of  these  societies  is  needed  before  such 
problems  of  band  organization  can  be  resolved. 

Whatever  term  is  assigned  to  groups  that 
comprise  a society,  certain  bases  for  compari- 
son can  be  posited.  Helm  ( 1969  ) states  the 
following  regarding  such  comparisons: 

By  anthropological  convention,  band  societies 
are  set  apart  from  non-band  societies  of  all  kinds. 
But  I do  not  believe  the  features  conventionally 
used  to  identify  a band  society — nomadism,  lack 
of  central  tribal  authority,  and  hunting-gathering 
pursuits  . . . make  the  problems  of  methodology 
in  the  analysis  and  classification  of  community 
composition  inherently  different  from  those  en- 
countered by  perceptive  ethnologists  working  in 
non-band  societies. 

It  is  possible  to  compare  the  kinship  makeup 
and  the  family  organization  of  the  permanent 
winter  villages  of  North  Alaska  with  the  band 
assemblages  and  family  organization  in  the 
Central  Eskimo  regions.  On  a larger  scale, 
units  showing  useful  bases  for  comparison  will 
certainly  be  found  throughout  much  of  the 
hunting  and  gathering  world. 

Reference  to  voluntary  relationships  such  as 
Central  Eskimo  seal  sharing  partnerships  or 
North  Alaskan  whaling  crews  or  karigi  organi- 
zation suggest  that  classifications  of  the  social 
structures  of  hunting  groups  have  perhaps 
placed  too  much  emphasis  on  kinship  factors. 
Classifications  or  typologies  of  hunting  societies 
should  be  enlarged  to  include  features  that  lie 
outside  kinship  considerations.  Residence  and 
marriage  practices  have  generally  been  the 
chief  criteria  for  classifying  bands  but  perhaps 
these  features  are  not  always  the  chief  dis- 
tinguishing attributes  of  band  societies. 


Damas  The  Diversity  of  Eskimo  Societies 


Classification  of  bands  in  the  Central  Eskimo 
area  based  only  on  kinship  composition,  which 
is  uniform,  tends  to  obscure  important  differ- 
ences in  the  family  organization,  the  patterns 
of  leadership  and  food  distribution  practices. 
The  selection  of  criteria  for  band  types  from 
such  diverse  features  requires  considerable 
care. 

In  addition,  classifications  can  be  meaning- 
ful only  if  the  ethnography  of  individual  groups 
is  sound  and  approaches  completeness.  Just 
as  there  is  no  great  uniformity  in  the  quality  or 
completeness  of  information  about  all  Eskimo 
societies,  there  is  no  great  uniformity  in  the 
data  on  hunting  peoples  throughout  the  world. 
Considerable  additional  research  is  needed  be- 
fore statistical  comparisons  of  hunting  groups 
can  be  highly  reliable.  The  rapid  disappear- 
ance of  such  groups  places  the  problems  of  sal- 
vage foremost.  In  many  cases  a closer  examina- 
tion of  ethnohistoric  sources  will  be  the  chief 
means  available  for  reconstructing  clear  pic- 
tures of  such  societies. 

Problems  of  function  also  appear  to  be  com- 
pounded by  the  variability  that  has  been  noted 
here.  The  integration  of  such  features  as  karigi 
organization  or  seal  sharing  practices  into 
societies  differing  in  a number  of  other  features 
suggests  that  possibly  in  the  world  at  large 
alternate  features  will  be  integrated  into  similar 
systems  and  similar  features  integrated  into 
otherwise  contrasting  systems. 


1 1 7 

Finally,  problems  of  the  adaptation  of  soc- 
iety to  environment  seem  to  become  more 
complex  when  the  diversity  noted  here  is  taken 
into  account.4  This  diversity  did  not  always 
conform  to  a concomitant  variation  in  sub- 
sistence or  ecology.  Although  strong  arguments 
can  be  advanced  for  a close  harmony  existing 
between  the  pattern  of  exploitation  and  certain 
features  of  the  settlement  pattern  in  the  Eskimo 
area  and  probably  in  the  world  of  hunters  as  a 
whole,  the  relationships  that  exist  between 
these  settlement  patterns  and  variable  com- 
munity patterns  appear  to  be  less  rigid  and 
perhaps  will  allow  alternatives  in  every  con- 
ceivable case.5 

While  the  diversity  of  the  social  forms  found 
within  hunting  and  gathering  societies  may 
comprise  only  a narrow  segment  of  the  total 
spectrum  of  social  types,  a proper  appreciation 
of  this  diversity  will  be  an  important  step  to- 
ward their  proper  classification  and  eventually 
toward  an  understanding  of  the  problems  of 
process  or  evolution. 


4.  A more  detailed  appraisal  of  ecological  factors  in 
Central  Eskimo  society  will  be  forthcoming  in  an  article 
by  the  author  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Conference  on 
Cultural  Ecology,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  August  3-6,  1966. 

5.  Chang  (1962)  has  applied  the  concepts  “settlement 
pattern”  and  “community  pattern”  to  circumpolar 
societies,  but  in  doing  so  he  assumes  a closer  relationship 
between  the  two  systems  than  is  espoused  in  this  paper. 


The  Nature  of  Dogrib  Socioterritorial  Groups 


JUNE  HELM 


This  is  an  attempt  to  characterize  and  cate- 
gorize socioterritorial  groups  among  the 
Athapaskan  Dogrib  Indians  of  the  north- 
western Canadian  subarctic.1  By  socioterri- 
torial, I specify  those  kinds  of  groups  which 
conjoin  settlement  pattern  with  community 
pattern  (Helm,  1969  ).  That  is,  I am  con- 
cerned both  with  “any  form  of  human  occupa- 
tion . . . over  a particular  locale”  or  range 
(Chang,  1962),  and  with  the  nature  of  the 
social  group  constituted  by  the  occupants  of 
the  locale  or  range. 

The  three  kinds  of  socioterritorial  groups 
which  I identify  among  the  Dogrib2  I have 
termed  the  regional  band  (comparable  to  the 
“macrocostpic  unit  of  social  organization” 
identified  by  Honigmann  [1946,  p.  64]  for  the 
inland  Northern  Athapaskans),  the  local  band 
(equivalent  to  Honigmann’s  “microcosmic 
unit”),  and  the  task  group. 

Membership  in  these  three  kinds  of  socio- 
territorial entities  is  in  no  wise  mutually  ex- 
clusive. An  individual  may  at  the  same  time 
have  social  identity  as  a member  of  a regional 
band  and  of  a local  band,  and,  by  the  simple 
fact  of  his  presence,  also  be  a member  of  a task 
group.  Segments  of  the  local  band  and  regional 
band  operate  as  task  groups  (as  defined  be- 
low). These  three  kinds  of  groups,  however, 
may  be  segregated  analytically  by  time-and- 
space  dimensions — namely,  temporal  duration 
and  spatial  (settlement)  cohesion — and  by 


three  foci  around  which  membership  revolves. 

The  foci  of  membership  identification  and 
recruitment  are  (1)  territorial  range,  (2)  speci- 
fic resources  and  resource  locales  within  the 
range,  and  (3)  kinship.  I see  the  ecological- 
subsistence  complex  of  range  and  resources 
conjoined  with  an  ego-based  kinship  network 
as  the  basic  forces  in  the  creation  and  structur- 
ing of  the  three  sorts  of  socioterritorial  groups. 
Range,  resources,  and  kinship  not  only  affect, 
but  effect,  socioterritorial  organization.  Further- 
more, each  in  turn  serves  as  the  prime  focus  of 
identity  and  affiliation  for  regional  band,  for 

1 . I present  the  discussion  in  terms  of  the  Dogribs,  on 
whom  I have  the  most  data.  I have,  however,  drawn  on 
material  from  neighboring  Arctic  Drainage  Athapaskan 
peoples  to  build  the  broad  characterization  which  I 
believe  to  be  generally  applicable  to  the  Mackenzie 
Drainage  Athapaskans  or  Dene.  All  data  are,  of  course, 
postcontact.  I deal  with  what  I judge  to  be  the  more 
traditional  social  and  demographic  arrangements  (not 
treating  of  the  trading-fort  settlement, for  example),  but 
the  extent  to  which  these  match  truly  aboriginal  arrange- 
ments must  always  remain  problematical.  Some  of  the 
major  postcontact  shifts  in  exploitative  and  demographic 
patterns,  such  as  increasing  sedentarization,  are  discussed 
in  Helm  and  Damas,  1963. 

2.  For  the  purposes  of  brevity,  I shall  ignore  the  diffi- 
cult problem  of  what,  if  anything,  constitutes  a “tribe” 
in  such  a simple  society  as  the  Dogrib.  I suggest  that  in 
structural  terms  the  “tribe”  may  be  defined  as  the 
greatest  extension  of  population  throughout  which  there 
is  sufficient  intermarriage  to  maintain  many-sided  social 
communication. 


1 18 


Helm  The  Nature  of  Dogrib  Socioterritorial  Groups 


"9 


kinship 


Figure  i. 


the  task  group,  and  for  the  local  band,  res- 
pectively. For  the  regional  band,  the  prime 
focus  of  identity  is  the  territorial  range;  a task 
group  forms  in  response  to  a specific  and 
localized3  resource;  the  strength  of  primary  kin 
bonds  holds  the  local  band  together  in  space 
and  through  time. 

The  varying  weight  of  these  three  factors 
affects  the  temporal  and  spatial  dimensions 

3.  In  this  paper,  the  usage  of  “local”  and  “localized” 
in  regard  to  human  groups  and  resources  should  not 
necessarily  be  taken  to  mean  immobility.  “Local”  and 
“localized”  here  refer  to  the  spatially  compacted  condi- 
tion of  the  group  (e.g.,  a local  band)  or  of  the  resource 
(e.g.,  a caribou  herd),  whether  the  group  or  resource  is 
“on  the  move”  or  not. 


of  the  three  kinds  of  socioterritorial  groups. 

The  triangle  diagram  (Fig.  i)  attempts  a 
visual  construction  of  the  interplay  of  the  speci- 
fying and  discriminating  features  of  regional 
bands,  local  bands,  and  task  groups.  The  size 
of  these  kinds  of  socioterritorial  groups  is  a 
function  of  the  identity-affiliation  factors  and 
the  time-space  dimensions.  Table  i presents  a 
chart  of  the  main  features  differentiating  the 
three  kinds  of  groups. 

In  the  persons  exploiting  the  various  and 
variable  resources  within  a recognized  range 
or  territory,  the  regional  band  has  its  social 
identity  as  a “people.”  The  total  territory  yields 
sufficient  materials  for  the  necessities  of  life 
(famine  periods  excepted)  so  that  within  its 


20  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 


^ 

.£  s 3 

TJ  ..  C3 
£ C U 


*5  c a 

o tx: 

O t;  T3 
? T3  C 


•S  g-  8 

u t a 

J2  nj  X 

(J  U 


bo  ^ ^ 
«j  G >>' 


aj  U 

ft,  V 


£ “ a 
60  SP 


u IS  a.  of 

> 4;  cs  k<u 


^ O S s 


<N  c 

I -tf  .*  o 
•L  ^ 

~ £ *r>  . 

I-  « U 

n*  I 

n in  O 


W) 

-rJ  'IT  £ 
C W)  2 

c I e $ 

•s  "O  $ 
.-0^0 
> — 5 i* 

• — 55  w> 

w be  _ - 

5 « ° 


c .5  « S 

O -C  o O 
U .ts  “ -a 
o S « " 

•*-*  *•"  /t< 

^ C O 

y 53  w jg 

Ip! 

(U  O bO  3 


§»  J -$ 

S T3  o 

? c g 

W V 

^ (X  ^ 

^ -a 


diHsaaawaw  aw 
AXIXN3QI  ao  iooa 


SNoisNaiMia 

aovas-amx 


saaaxvaa 

avNoixiaav 


121 


Helm 

domain  the  regional  band  can  endure  as  an 
identity  for  generations.  (Table  2 presents 
documentation  identifying  and  placing  Dogrib 
regional  bands.)  Characteristically,  the  total 
constituency  of  the  regional  band  is  not 
physically  together.  The  families  that  make  up 
the  regional  band  are  most  apt  to  all  come  to- 
gether when  operating  as  a task  group  exploit- 
ing a resource  which  allows  large  assembly,  as 
at  a fall  fishing  camp.  Most  of  the  time, 
physical  co-presence  and  social  communication 
is  shifting,  intermittent,  and  piecemeal.  Within 
the  regional  band  there  is  kin-connectedness  in 
the  form  of  a network  of  primary  affinal  and 
consanguineal  ties  between  members.4  But 
neither  kinship  nor  a single  specific  resource  is 
the  focus  of  total  group  identity  per  se. 

The  local  band  also  exploits  a range,  often 
as  a subunit  within  a regional  band,  and,  like 
the  regional  band,  is  “concerned  with  the  total 
problem  of  living  within  its  territory”  (Slo- 
bodin,  1962,  p.  75).  But  it  is  distinctive  as  a 
spatial  grouping-together  of  kinsmen,  charac- 
teristically structured  around  a core  sibling 
set,  including  females  as  well  as  males,  with 
their  spouses.  To  nucleated-settlement  pattern 
and  core-kin  focus  must  be  added  some  degree 
of  temporal  duration  to  set  the  local  band  apart 
from  a kind  of  task  group. 

The  task  group  is  pre-eminently  a grouping- 
together  of  persons  concentrating  upon  the 
exploitation  of  a specific  seasonal  resource, 
ordinarily  at  some  locale  or  along  some  route 
within  the  total  range  of  a regional  band. 
Whether  activities  are  coordinated  and/or 
produce  shared  depend  upon  the  particular 
purpose  of  the  task  group  (Helm,  1965a).  By 
definition,  the  task  group  lacks  temporal  dura- 
tion beyond  a few  weeks.  The  social  composi- 
tion of  the  task  group  may  either  be  based  on 
the  basic  social  building  block,  the  family, 
composed  of  a conjugal  pair  with  dependents, 
or  it  may  be  all  male.  It  is  apparent  that  kin 
linkages  serve  as  a mechanism  of  affiliation  in 
forming  a task  group,  but  there  is  also  evidence 

4.  Analysis  of  one  Dogrib  regional  band,  the  Marten 
Lake  People,  over  a 50-year  period  reveals  that  every 
resident  in  three  generational  horizons  had  as  fellow 
member  of  the  band  one  or  more  primary  consanguines 
(siblings  and/or  parents)  or  held  the  primary  affinal  tie 
of  marriage  to  an  already  consanguineally  linked  member 
of  the  band  (Helm.  1965a). 


The  Mature  of  Dogrib  Socioterritorial  Groups 

that  friendships  and  special  aptitudes  some- 
times play  a role. 

Task  groups  vary  in  size  and  in  sex-age 
composition,  depending  largely  upon  the 
nature  of  the  resource  which  is  the  focus  of  task 
group  creation.  Today,  two  or  three  nuclear 
families  (usually  linked  by  sibling  and/or 
parent-child  ties)  may  join  together  for  periods 
of  two  weeks  to  two  months  of  trapping,  com- 
bined with  general  subsistence  activities.  The 
distinction  between  such  a seasonal,  linked- 
family  task  group  and  what  I identify  as  a local 
band  can  be  made  only  on  the  sliding  scale  of 
duration.  I have  suggested  elsewhere  that  the 
aboriginal  equivalent  of  today’s  local  band  may 
have  been  a relatively  short-lived  small  group- 
ing of  this  sort  (Helm,  1965a,  p.  379). 

At  the  appropriate  season,  a task  group  may 
also  be  formed  of  many  nuclear  families  around 
a fishing  locale  or  along  the  route  of  a caribou 
migration.  But  task  groups  need  not  always  be 
constituted  of  family  units.  Today,  most  hunt- 
ing expeditions,  for  example,  are  all  male,  with 
the  women  and  children  left  behind  in  camp  or 
village. 

Conclusions  and 
Theoretical  Considerations 

In  conclusion,  I must  make  some  effort  to 
clarify  the  nature  of  the  kinship  principle  which 
I see  operative  in  Athapaskan  band  affiliation 
— specifically,  in  post-nuptial  band  residence. 

I believe  the  same  principle  also  to  be,  if  not 
critical,  significant  in  task-group  assemblages. 

From  the  Dogribs,  as  with  other  Mackenzie 
Drainage  Athapaskans,  it  is  impossible  to 
elicit  “rules”  regarding  preferential  marriage 
or  local  or  regional  band  endogamy  or  exo- 
gamy. So  also,  with  post-nuptial  residence, 
except  for  the  traditional  understanding  that 
the  young  husband  should  “work  for”  (and 
thereby  reside  with  or  by)  his  father-in-law 
until  the  birth  of  the  first  child.  Add  to  all  this 
the  fact  that  the  people  move  around  the  land 
“visiting”  and  that  occasionally  some  do  not 
return  from  whence  they  came. 

The  results  of  a search  for  residential  pattern 
in  this  seeming  flux  have  been  presented  in  an 
earlier  paper  (Helm,  1965a).  From  inspection 
of  the  kinship  connections  between  conjugal 


Social  and  Territorial  Organization 


Figure  2.  Ranges  (Approximate)  of  Dogrib  Regional  Bands  (after  Petitot, 
1891;  Osgood,  1932,  1936;  and  Helm,  1962  field  notes). 


Some  local  band-hamlets  are  indicated  by  numerals  (for  identification,  see 
Table  2).  The  eastern  reaches  of  Band  C,  Edge-of-the-Woods  People,  are  barren 
grounds,  exploited  only  for  brief  seasonal  caribou  hunts  (and,  in  the  past,  musk-ox 
hunts) . 


Helm  The  Nature  of  Dogrib  Socioterritorial  Groups  123 


Table  2 Dogrib  Regional  Bands : Documentation  over  a 70-year  period 

(Regional  Band  designations  are  italicized.  Local  group  designations  are  not  complete,  but  are 
included  when  noted  in  the  literature.  Designations  of  local  bands  are  not  italicized.  The  capital 
letters  in  parentheses  preceding  references  to  local  groups  refer  to  the  site  of  their  hamlets  or 
main  camps  located  on  the  map  in  Figure  2.) 


Petitot  (1891) 

(A) 

Klin-tchanpe : Flancs-de-Chien,  Plats-Cotis-de-Chien  proprement  dits-Le  long  de 
la  baie  du  Nord  du  grand  lac  des  Esclaves. 

(B) 

Tsan-tpie-pottinl : gens  du  lac  Excrementiel — Autour  du  lac  la  Martre  et  le  long  de 
la  riviere  de  mime  nom. 

(C) 

Tpa-kfwlU-pottinl : gehs  de  l’Anus-de-l’Eau,  gens  du  large — Au  sudest  du  grand 
lac  des  Ours,  et  4 la  source  du  fleuve  Copper-mine. 

(D-E)  Ttsl-pottinl:  gens  des  Canots  en  <fcorce,  gens  du  Lac — Autour  des  rivages 

miridionaux  du  grand  lac  des  Ours. 

Est.  Total  Pop.:  1864 — Petitot  (1884-85)  records  788  Dogribs  trading  into  Old  Fort  Rae, 
plus  47  in  Forts  Norman  and  Franklin  area  at  Great  Bear  Lake.  Total  = 835. 

Osgood  (1932) 

(A) 

Band  1 : inhabits  the  country  close  to  Rae.  A subdivision  . . . hunts  in  the  country 
west  of  the  N.  arm  of  Great  Slave  Lake  to  within  75  miles  of  Mackenzie  River. 

(B) 

Band  2:  inhabits  the  country  around  lac  la  Martre  and  lac  Grandin  . . . 

(C) 

Band  4:  lives  east  of  band  3. 

(D) 

Band  3 : occupies  the  country  on  both  sides  of  the  canoe  route  between  Great  Slave 
Lake  and  McTavish  Bay.  It  does  not  come  closer  to  Great  Bear  lake  than  lake 
Clut,  south  of  Conjuror  bay. 

(E) 

Band  3:  emigrated  from  band  3.  Has  become  disassociated,  living  in  Satudene 
country  and  trading  into  Norman  since  1914. 

Oblate  Census  ( 1 9 1 1 ) ; 

(A) 

(1)  Les  Piches  (u  fh) 

with  number  of 

(2)  “Famille  Bruno” — Riviire  aux  Saules,  aux  Fort  (19  f h) 

family  heads  (f  h) 

(B) 

Lac  la  Martre  ( 1 7 f h) 

(C) 

Camp  Germain  (13  f h)  [V.T. : main  group  of  the  Edge-of-the- Woods  People.] 

(6)  Maisons  de  Befwo  (4  f h) ; 

(7)  Kfwekat’inlin  (5  f h) ; 

(8)  Camp  Gallu  (9  f h) ; 

[Cabin  sites  en  route  to  the  “edge  of  the  woods.”  V.T.  remembers  these  as 
hamlets  abandoned  as  a generation  died.] 


(D-E)  U Lac  d’Ours 

Brigade  Teremie  (19  f h) 

Brigade  du  Chef  du  Lac  d’Ours  (12  f h)  [The  “Brigades”  probably  refer  to  the 
followers  of  two  trading  chiefs.  V.T.’s  memory  of  the  affiliations  of  men  listed  in 
each  brigade  does  not  separate  the  two  brigades  into  Bands  D and  E respectively. 
Several  men  listed  under  the  Bear  Lake  Chief’s  brigade  V.T.  assigns  to  the 
et’at’in  proper  and  vice  versa.  This  probably  reflects  the  shifting  affiliations  of 
families  through  time.] 

(3)  Fond  du  Lac  (23  f h) 

Est.  Total  Pop.:  1911 — Total  of  132  family  household  units.  At  1959  ratio  of  6.24  persons 
per  household  unit,  a total  population  estimate  of  823  persons  is  arrived  at.  This  estimate 
may  be  too  high  (before  medical  services). 


[1 continued 


1 24  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 


Table  2 continued ] 

Vital  Thomas,  Dogrib 
informant  (1962*) 
plus  other  field  data 


(A)  tagahot’in:  “Follow-the-Shore-People.”  People  inhabiting  the  shore  of  the  North 
Arm  of  Great  Slave  Lake  between  the  settlements  qf  Rae  and  Y ellowknife. 

(1)  Many  formerly  lived  at  Trout  Rock.  Many  have  moved.  Some  are  now  at 
enotah,  so  known  as  enotahot’in. 

(2)  betcokont’i° : Fort  People  (“Big-Knife-House  People.”)  Indians  who  stay  at 
the  Fort.  “All  the  rest,  couldn’t  say  they  are  really  Fort  People,  because 
sometimes  they  move  out  for  hunting  and  fishing.” 

(B)  tsontihot’in : “Feces  Lake  People.”  Marten  Lake  People.  Between  1925-52  there 
were  two  local  band  clusters,  at  (4)  egak’i°lin  and  at  (5)  mi”got’in  (site  of  the 
“People  of  the  Nets”).  All  have  now  settled  around  the  government  schoolhouse 
at  the  mi"got’in  site. 

(C)  wekwitihot’in  (Snare  Lake  People),  or  detsinlahot’in  (“Edge-of-the- Woods  People”), 
or  xozihot'i”  (“Barrens  People”),  “depending  on  where  they  go”  Until  1962-63 
these  people  had  been  for  some  years  based  in  the  Fort.  About  twenty  families 
have  since  started  a settlement  at  (9)  Snare  Lake.  The  site  of  (7)  kwekateli"  is  still 
occupied  seasonally. 

(D)  et’at’in:  “Next-to-Another-Tribe-People.”  Many  frequented  Faber  Lake.  Some 
now  residing  in  bush  hamlets  at  (10)  Rae  Lake  and  (1 1)  Hislop  Lake. 

A long-established  settlement  is  (3)  karelinhot’in  , the  present  Marian  River 
Village  [same  as  (3)  in  the  Oblate  Census],  “They  came  there  because  of  good 
fishing  there  and  good  shelter  from  the  wind.  And  everyone  followed  the  rivers, 
summer  and  winter.” 


(E)  satihot’in : “Bear  Lake  People,”  beyond  the  et'at’in , “mostly  along  the  south  side  of 
Great  Bear  Lake.”  Recognized- by  V.T.  as  “mostly  Dogribs.”  Now,  a few  descen- 
dants in  the  Rae  area,  most  at  Great  Bear  Lake  trading  into  Fort  Norman. 


Est.  Total  Pop. : 1959 — Government  count  (mimeo  band  rolls)  ofDogribs  (including  those 
in  Yellowknife)  = 1,023,  with  164  family-household  (hu-wi-ch)  units,  yielding  6.24 
persons  per  unit. 


* During  a return  to  the  field  in  1967,  it  was  possible  to  check  with  Vital  Thomas  the  summary  compiled  from 
the  1962  data.  Several  minor  emendations  based  on  the  1967  data  have  been  incorporated  here.  Data  on  Dogrib 
peopulations  presently  near  the  town  of  Yellowknife  and  others  formerly  south  of  Yellowknife  are  not  included. 


pairs  in  a sample  of  Athapaskan  bands,  I ad- 
duce the  covert  directive  of  primary  relative 
relationship  serving  as  a determinate  limit  on 
local  and  regional  band  residence-affiliation 
of  the  conjugal  pair  after  marriage.  Almost 
without  exception,  no  married  pair  is  residing 
with  a local  band  or  within  a regional  band 
domain  unless  at  least  one  spouse  of  that  pair, 
male  or  female,  had  at  time  of  entry  a primary 
consanguine,  of  either  sex,  already  resident 
within  the  band. 

In  practice,  this  bilateral  primary  linkage 
principle  allows  multiple  residence  alternatives 
for  the  conjugal  pair.  From  the  position  of 
male  Ego,  for  example,  the  man  may  marry 
within  the  local5  and/or  regional  band  where  he 
resides  with  his  parents.  Or  he  may,  after 


bride-service,  bring  an  “alien”  wife  back  to  his 
band.  Or  he  and  his  wife  may,  early  or  later  in 
conjugal  life,  elect  to  live  with  the  band  where 
his  wife’s  parents  or  one  or  more  siblings  are 
established.  Or  he  and  his  wife  may  link  into 
a band  where  his  brother  or  sister,  married  to 
a member  of  that  band,  resides.  In  later  years, 
the  man  and  his  wife  may  “join”  the  band 
where  a married  child  resides.  And  so  on. 

I have  recently  begun  to  look  at  other  hunt- 
ing societies  for  which  ethnologists  have  pro- 
vided data  on  the  kin-composition  of  actual 

5.  Requisite  age,  unmarried  status  and  kinship  dis- 
tance of  the  co-resident  female  permitting.  The  small 
size  and  closely  kin-linked  composition  of  the  local  band 
usually  forces  a man  to  look  for  a bride  beyond  his  local 
band. 


Helm  The  Nature  of  Dogrib  Socioterritorial  Groups 


local  groupings,  short-lived  or  long-lived.6  I 
find  that  Professor  Levi-Strauss’  (1940)  fluc- 
tuating Nambikwara  bands  (a  1 and  b 1) 
display  primary  bilateral  linkage  by  conjugal 
unit  around  a sibling  set  with  a brother-leader, 
comparable  to  the  Northern  Athapaskan  local 
band.  The  pattern  of  kin-composition  of  a 
sample  of  IKung  Bushman  bands  (Marshall 
i960,  pp.  323-33)  is  indistinguishable  from 
that  of  Athapaskan  local  bands,  as  is  Marshall’s 
description  of  the  chain-like  residential  linkage 
through  bilateral  primary  ties  (pp.  344-45). 
From  Australia,  the  information  provided  by 
McCarthy  and  McArthur  (i960)  on  the  kin- 
composition  of  two  Arnhem  Land  task  groups 
reveals  bilateral  linkages  between  constituent 
conjugal  pairs  (with  the  result  that  men  of 
different  “country,”  totem,  and  moiety  are  in 
co-residence).  Hiatt  has  recently  specified  a 

6.  I am  indebted  to  Beryl  C.  Gillespie  for  her  search 
for  cases  in  the  literature. 


125 

number  of  Australian  aborigine  societies  in 
which  the  “usual  common  residence  groups,” 
as  constrasted  with  the  patri-line  land-owning 
units,  were  composed  of  men  of  several  patri- 
lineal descent  groups  and  in  which  the  “small 
food-seeking  units  [task  groups]  commonly 
contained  nonagnatic  kinsmen”(ig62,  p.  285). 
In  terms  of  who  is  actually  “in  community” 
with  whom — for  example,  brother-in-law  with 
brother-in-law  rather  than  brother  with 
brother — the  picture  of  de  facto  residence 
association  and  economic  interaction  is  quite 
different  from  that  to  be  deduced  from  attri- 
butions of  dejure  patrilocality. 

From  these  few  cases  alone,  I submit  that, 
for  full  comprehension  of  the  economic  and 
social  dynamics  of  hunting  societies  and  for 
cross-societal  comparisons,  the  empirical  pat- 
terns of  post-nuptial  co-residence,  stable  or 
shifting,  demand  as  much  attention  as  do 
formal  “rules”  of  kin  alliance  and  residence 
assignment. 


The  Birhor  of  India 

and  Some  Comments  on  Band  Organization 

B.  J.  WILLIAMS 


This  paper  falls  into  roughly  three  sections. 
The  first  is  a preface  explaining  a particular 
approach  to  the  study  of  hunting-gathering 
groups  and  why  this  is  used  by  a person  whose 
primary  interests  are  in  physical  anthropology. 
The  second  part  constitutes  data  on  a particular 
group,  the  Birhor  of  India,  who  became  a subject 
of  investigation  in  the  pursuit  of  these  interests. 
The  third  part  explores  some  implications  of 
such  a view  of  hunting-gathering  society. 

My  interests  are  those  of  a physical  anthro- 
pologist, using,  primarily,  the  approaches  of 
population  genetics  in  the  study  of  human  evo- 
lution. Some  areas  in  which  these  interests  are 
closely  allied  to  interests  of  ethnology  are  (i) 
social  organization  as  it  effects  mating  patterns 
and  (2)  the  extent  to  which  a single  model  of 
hunting-gathering  society  might  apply  to 
Paleolithic  groups.  The  problem  is  not  whether 
it  is  possible  to  have  more  or  less  complex 
societies  based  on  a hunting  economy,  but  what 
is  the  modal  form  and  how  extensive  might 
such  a form  have  been  at  a given  time  in  the 
past.  The  question  is  one  of  whether  or  not  the 
findings  of  the  ethnologist  can  potentially  be 
useful  in  making  statements  about  past  social 
structures  and  population  demography  which 
have  a bearing  on  genetic  parameters  such  as 
total  mating  population  size,  degree  of  isola- 
tion, rate  of  gene  flow,  and  rate  of  inbreeding. 


Not  being  an  ethnologist,  I have  proceeded 
in  what  may  seem  to  the  ethnologist  a slightly 
cavalier  fashion — to  set  up  a model  of  hunting 
society  based  on  certain  assumptions,  then  to 
seek  evidence  on  certain  points  of  the  model. 
Field  investigations  among  the  Birhor  of  India 
were  a part  of  this  endeavor.  Some  of  the 
assumptions  are  sketched  in  the  following 
paragraphs. 

The  broader  assumptions  are  as  follows: 

1 (a).  Most  animals  will  exhibit  either  sex- 
ual or  economic  territoriality — or 
both. 

1 (b).  Animals  whose  variation  in  popula- 
tion numbers  is  strongly  influenced 
by  variation  in  food  supply  or  other 
economic  variables  will  exhibit  eco- 
nomic territoriality. 

1 (c).  Such  territoriality  implies  spatial 
aggregation. 

2.  Counter  to  the  above  is  the  eco- 
logical-economic desideratum  of  dis- 
tributing the  population  homo- 
geneously with  respect  to  the 
distribution  of  food  supply  or  other 
vital  resources. 

The  optimal  resolution  of  these  two  forces  is 
a local  organization  whose  size  is  the  mini- 
mum necessary  to  exploit  the  collected  foods, 
maintain  territorial  integrity  and  absorb  or 


126 


Williams  The  Birhor  of  India  and  Some  Comments  on  Band  Organization  127 


accommodate  all  but  the  rarest  kinds  of  chance 
fluctuation  in  resources,  sex  ratio,  and  so  forth. 

To  state  a conclusion  in  advance  of  the  argu- 
ment, I feel  that  what  was  called  the  patrilocal 
horde  by  Radcliffe-Brown  (1931),  the  patri- 
lineal band  by  Steward  (1938b,  1955)  or  the 
patrilocal  band  by  Service  (1962)  represents 
such  an  optimal  solution  for  hunting-gathering 
economies  over  a very  broad  range  of  environ- 
mental diversity.  To  what  extent  this  kind  of 
local  organization  was  realized  is  what  was 
debated  at  the  symposium  and  in  the  ethno- 
graphic literature  today. 

This  is  not  to  agree  entirely  with  the  con- 
ceptualization of  the  hunting-gathering  band 
as  presented  by  Radcliffe-Brown,  Steward, 
and  Service,  nor  is  it  to  say  that  the  patrilocal 
band  is  the  only  possibility.  As  one  interested 
in  population  genetics  I am  interested  in  the 
existence  of  a predominant  form — not  the  full 
range  of  possibilities  that  might  be  realized,  as 
perhaps  would  be  the  interest  of  the  ethno- 
logist. And  I believe  that  what  I call  the 
lineage-band,  a local  group  whose  central 
members  are  of  a single  lineage,  represents 
such  a structure  for  hunting-gathering  eco- 
nomics. The  argument  leading  to  this  con- 
clusion, based  on  the  preceding  assumptions, 
runs  as  follows:  To  go  back  to  the  concept  of 
territoriality  for  a moment,  we  find  that  only 
among  the  Canidae  and  the  Primates  can 
multiple,  sexually  mature  adult  males  be 
accommodated  within  the  same,  territorially 
autonomous,  social  group.  This  phenomenon 
reaches  its  highest  development  in  the  Pri- 
mates. This  has  occurred  in  both  cases  through 
the  evolution  of  a dominance  hierarchy  which 
can  be  learned  by  individual  males  and  which 
is  strong  enough  to  override,  with  a certain 
effectiveness,  sexual  impulses. 

In  the  genus  Homo  alone  this  system  is  ex- 
tended to  permit  greater  cooperation  among 
males  by  the  assignation  of  defined  sexual 
rights  which  are  relatively  exclusive  between 
a male  and  one  or  more  females.  The  stable 
emotional  ties  engendered. permit  cooperative 
behavior  on  a scale  not  found  in  other  Primate 
societies.  These  affective  ties  are  further  ex- 
tended outward  in  all  contemporary  human 
societies  by  means  of  what  we  term  a kinship 
system,  that  is,  symbols  are  attached  to  certain 
affective  emotions  early  in  the  life  of  the  child 


which  can  then  be  extended  by  extending  the 
symbols  to  a group  larger  than  the  immediately 
co-resident  household. 

Furthermore,  in  contemporary  societies  in 
which  kinship  systems  provide  an  important 
part  of  the  jural  structure  of  society,  marriage 
bonds  are  channeled  in  such  a way  as  to  ex- 
tend these  affective  ties  between  suprafamilial 
social  units  permitting  cooperative  or  col- 
laborative interactions  which  could  not  other- 
wise be  maintained  and  which  we  recognize 
as  forms  of  affiliation. 

I suggest  that  the  most  efficient  form  of  local 
organization  for'  hunting-gathering  societies, 
in  terms  of  the  criteria  set  forth  previously,  is 
one  in  which  marriage  rules  lead  to  exogamic 
marriage  practices  between  territorially  auto- 
nomous groups.  This  makes  possible  a smaller 
territorial  group,  that  is,  a population  whose 
distribution  is  more  closely  correlated  with  the 
distribution  of  resources  than  if  all  matings 
had  to  be  contracted  within  the  group  and  if 
marriage  alliances  were  not  maintained  with 
all  surrounding  such  groups. 

These  marriage  alliances  serve  a number  of 
functions  leading  to  demographic  stability: 
(1)  they  reduce  conflict  between  territorially 
autonomous  groups  (in  a sense  they  reduce 
autonomy);  (2)  they  can  provide  access  to 
“windfalls”  for  all  the  affiliated  bands  at  cer- 
tain times  of  the  year,  for  example,  beached 
whales,  fish  run  sites,  passes  used  by  migratory 
herds,  etc.;  (3)  they  provide  a form  of  insur- 
ance in  that  matrilateral  connections  can  be 
utilized  (assuming  patrilocal  residence)  in 
seeking  haven  in  times  of  hardship,  that  is,  the 
population  can  temporarily  redistribute  itself. 

I suggest,  therefore,  that  the  territorial  social 
unit  most  often  to  be  expected  in  societies  with 
hunting  economies  is  an  exogamous  band  of 
the  minimum  size  necessary  to  maintain  con- 
tinuing marriage  relations  with  all  surrounding 
such  bands.  This  criterion  is  met  by  a band 
size  of  35-75  individuals.  The  criterion  of 
exogamy  is  met  in  unilineal  bands  by  unilateral 
cross-cousin  marriage.  This  form  of  marriage 
was  not  the  case  among  the  Birhor,  as  will  be 
shown  below.  Other  practices  detailed  in  the 
ethnographic  literature  seem  to  serve  also  to 
extend  affiliation  to  surrounding  groups. 
Among  the  Andamanese  an  unusual  elabora- 
tion of  adoption  practices  seems  to  have 


128  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

fulfilled  this  function.  This  may  also  have  been 
the  case  to  a certain  extent  among  Eskimo 
groups. 

The  bonds  of  alliance  created  by  marriage 
exchange  are  reinforced  by  die  annual  aggre- 
gation of  some  or  all  of  the  bands  so  affiliated, 
at  a season  when  such  gatherings  are  economi- 
cally feasible,  and  under  circumstances  hedged 
by  ceremony.  Assuming  that  the  autonomous 
local  groups  are  patrilocal  lineage-bands,  the 
major  ideological  thrust  of  such  gatherings 
would  be  to  reinforce,  symbolically  objectify, 
and  ceremonialize  the  matrilateral  bonds 
affiliating  the  lineage-bands  whose  de  facto 
existence  needs  little  symbolic  mediation. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  when  the  impact  of 
Western  civilization  is  such  as  to  disrupt  the 
normal  dispersal  of  hunting  populations — 
collecting  them  around  trading  posts,  mission 
stations,  cattle  stations  or  schools — the  local 
band  organization  disappears  almost  com- 
pletely and  very  quickly.  The  matrilateral 
connections,  enshrined  in  ideology,  remain. 
They  remain  in  some  cases  to  organize  the 
part-society  then  existing;  they  remain  for  the 
salvage  ethnographer  to  retrieve.  As  Radcliffe- 
Brown  said  with  respect  to  Australian  groups 
“the  local  organization  is  the  first  part  of  the 
social  system  to  be  destroyed  by  the  advent  of 
the  Europeans”  (1931,  p.  35). 

What  has  been  presented  above  is  a model  of 
hunting  society,  perhaps  sketched  so  briefly  as 
to  be  cryptic,  which  is  not  quite  the  inflexible 
band  which  seemed  implicit  in  Steward’s 
formulation.  The  territorial  group,  hence  the 
group  with  primary  autonomy,  is  the  patri- 
local lineage-band.  It  is  capable  of  splitting 
into  even  smaller,  non-territorial  family  bands 
in  response  to  seasonal  scarcity.  It  is,  on  the 
other  hand,  allied  with  a larger  group  of  bands 
which  permits  and  even  requires  larger  aggre- 
gates for  at  least  short  periods  of  time.  This 
larger  grouping,  because  of  the  circulation  of 
females  and  the  visiting  patterns  involved  in 
marriage  affiliations,  tends  to  form  a cultural 
unity,  linguistically  and  otherwise. 

Implicit  in  such  a model  is  the  idea  that  the 
size  of  the  basic  social  unit  (or  units)  is  not 
a function  of  environmental  richness,  but 
instead  a function  of  the  system  of  filiation. 
Corollary  to  this,  geographic  variation  in  en- 
vironmental richness  is  met  by  variation  in  the 


size  of  the  territory  occupied  by  the  lineage- 
band. 

Investigations  were  carried  on  among  the 
Birhor  of  Hazaribagh  District,  South  Bihar, 
India,  during  1961-62.  The  Birhor  of  this 
region  are  still  engaged  in  hunting-gathering 
activities  and  provide  some  information  on  the 
hypotheses  proposed.  In  some  important  ways 
the  Birhor  do  not  meet  the  conditions  assumed 
in  the  model  of  hunting-gathering  society. 
They  are  neither  politically  autonomous  nor 
are  they  economically  autonomous. 

They  live  in  an  area  that  has  been  inhabited 
by  tribal  agriculturalists  for  a very  long  period 
of  time.  During  the  past  100-plus  years,  the 
area  has  also  seen  a large  influx  and  growth  of 
population  of  Hindu  and  Muslim  agricultura- 
lists who  now  far  outnumber  the  tribal  popula- 
tion. 

The  Birhor  trade  hunted  and  collected  items 
to  the  villagers  in  exchange  for  rice.  This  ex- 
change does  not  usually  take  place  in  markets. 
The  principal  game  animal  netted  and  traded 
by  the  Birhor  is  the  hare.  These,  if  they  are  to 
be  traded,  have  to  be  traded  on  the  same  day 
they  are  caught,  before  they  die.  This  necessity 
rules  out  the  normal  village  market  as  an  out- 
let. The  Birhor  also  spend  some  time  making 
rope  from  the  inner-bark  fiber  of  certain  vines. 
These  they  also  trade  for  rice.  Many  bands  take 
such  ropes  to  village  markets;  others  still  prefer 
to  avoid  markets. 

Not  only  do  the  Birhor  live  in  a form  of 
economic  parabiosis  with  the  agriculturalists, 
but  they  are  in  some  ways  a politically  sub- 
jugated minority.  Their  primary  political 
defense,  vis-a-vis  villagers,  is  a carefully  culti- 
vated anonymity.  This  is  a modus  vivendi 
which  fits  quite  well  the  migratory  hunting 
pattern  of  the  Birhor. 

These  conditions  which  are  a result  of  in- 
tensive interaction  with  dominant  groups 
makes  the  Birhor  less  than  ideal  as  a basis  for 
inferences  about  possible  forms  of  social 
organization  in  hunting  groups  living  only 
among  other  hunters.  On  the  other  hand,  they 
have  the  great  advantage  of  being  hunters  now. 
Therefore,  the  data  on  the  Birhor  is  not  a re- 
construction from  the  memory  of  informants. 
The  difficulties  inherent  in  working  with 
“memory  cultures”  have,  I believe,  been  par- 
ticularly important  in  discussions  of  local 


129 


Williams  The  Birhor  of  India  and  Some  Comments  on  Band  Organization 


organization  among  former  hunting  groups 
and  this  has  not  been  sufficiently  emphasized 
in  the  literature  (cf.  Chapter  17a). 

The  Birhor  band  is  composed  of  relatives, 
and  an  individual  can  normally  visit  other 
bands  only  in  which  he  has  relatives.  The 
ability  to  visit  another  band  also  implies  the 
potential  of  being  able  to  join  that  band  on  a 
more  permanent  basis.  Most  of  the  males  of  a 
given  band  will  be  members  of  a single  patri- 
lineal descent  group.  These  descent  groups  are 
differentiated  in  having  slightly  different  pan- 
theons, slightly  different  ceremonies  concern- 
ing these  deities,  and  different  sacred 
mountains. 

In  a field  census  of  25  bands  it  was  found  that 
thirteen  bands  had  only  one  lineage  repre- 
sented; eight  had  two  lineages;  three  had  three 
lineages;  and  one  band  had  four  lineages 
represented.  The  latter  band  was  atypically 
large  and  semi-settled.  In  terms  of  number  of 
individuals,  even  multi-lineage  bands  are  pre- 
dominantly of  a single  lineage.  Also,  since  this 
is  census  data,  it  includes  families  who  are 
involved  in  extended  visits  or  who  otherwise 
do  not  feel  themselves  permanently  attached 
to  the  group  in  which  they  were  censused. 

The  residence  arrangements  found  in  these 
bands  often  do  not  fit  simple  descriptive  cate- 
gories such  as  patrilocal,  matrilocal,  or  the 
more  esoteric  compounds.  A brief  description 
of  the  composition  of  four  bands  with  which 
the  author  worked  most  intensively  is  given 
below. 

Band  one:  At  its  usual  maximum,  this  band 
contained  nine  households.  Three  household 
heads  were  brothers.  One  was  the  widow  of  a 
fourth  brother.  One  was  the  husband  of  a sister 
of  these  brothers.  The  seventh  household  head 
was  a classificatory  “brother”  of  the  core 
sibling  group,  but  his  genealogy  and  theirs 
could  not  be  traced  reliably  to  a common  an- 
cestor. The  eighth  was  a “son”  of  the  classifi- 
catory brother.  The  ninth,  who  joined  this 
band  in  1961,  was  the  brother-in-law  of  the 
eighth. 

Band  two:  This  band  consisted  of  four  house- 
holds. The  two  elder  household  heads  were 
brothers.  One  household  head  was  a son  of 
these  brothers.  The  fourth  head  was  a son-in- 
law  of  these  brothers. 

Band  three:  This  was  an  unusual  case  in  that 


the  head  of  this  group  had  been  orphaned 
when  very  young  and  raised  in  a band  not  of 
his  father’s  lineage.  It  is  difficult,  under  such 
circumstances,  for  a man  to  secure  a bride  and 
even  more  unusual  that  he  can  form  a band 
around  himself.  This  band  consisted  of  six 
households.  T he  household  heads  included  the 
old  man,  two  of  his  married  sons,  two  sons  of 
his  first  wife  (by  an  earlier  husband  of  hers), 
and  the  son  of  one  of  the  latter  men. 

Band  four : Structurally,  this  was  the  simplest 
band.  If  consisted  of  the  household  of  an  old 
man  and  the  six  households  of  his  married 
sons,  the  offspring  of  his  two  co-wives. 

Although  the  genealogical  connections  be- 
tween families  in  some  of  the  bands  varies 
widely,  and  in  some  cases  could  not  be  traced, 
the  situation  is  not  viewed  as  being  this  com- 
plex by  the  Birhor.  For  them,  the  bands  were 
made  up  almost  entirely  of  brothers  and  fathers 
and  sons  with  their  families.  Of  the  25  families 
involved,  22  fit  this  pattern,  given  the  Birhor 
kinship  system.  The  only  three  household 
heads  who  could  not  be  fitted  into  a brother- 
brother  or  father-son  relation  were  kinds  of 
brothers-in-law.  And  these  three,  it  should  be 
noted,  were  not  living  with  their  wife’s 
mother’s  natal  band  but  with  their  wife’s 
father’s  natal  band.  In  sum,  I believe  that  the 
category  “patrilocal”  is,  at  least,  less  mislead- 
ing as  a description  of  the  residence  system 
than  any  other  rubric  we  might  apply. 

In  a previous  paper  (Williams,  in  press),  I 
presented  evidence  that  extended  familiarity 
with  a local  hunting  area  does  not  appear  to 
be  a factor  favoring  patrilocality  by  virtue  of 
increasing  hunting  efficiency.  Among  the 
Birhor,  a person  who  is  a better-than-average 
hunter  tends  to  be  so  whether  he  is  in  familiar 
or  unfamiliar  territory. 

The  Birhor  do  try  to  remain  in  a familiar 
area  and,  as  this  is  by  band,  this  takes  on 
aspects  of  what  could  be  called  a “home 
range.”  These  ranges  overlap  extensively  and 
if  territoriality  is  defined  in  terms  of  boundary 
defense,  there  is  no  territoriality.  Because  of 
their  subordinate  position  the  Birhor  are  in  no 
position  to  exclude  anyone  from  any  area.  One 
suspects  that  if  they  were  not  subordinate  in 
this  way,  the  situation  might  be  different. 
There  is  some  resentment  towards  a band 
which  moves  outside  its  traditional  area  and 


130  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

encroaches  closely  on  another  band.  Also,  there 
is  occasionally  considerably  hostility  toward 
the  agricultural  Santhal  who  sweep  through 
on  their  annual  “big  hunt”  which  can  remove 
quite  a bit  of  game  in  one  day. 

In  my  earlier  paper  (in  press)  major  portions 
of  which  were  circulated  prior  to  this  sym- 
posium, two  other  points  were  made  of  interest 
in  the  present  context.  The  first  was  that  the 
descent  unit  characterizing  the  band  is  best 
termed  a lineage.  The  second  point  was  that 
the  band,  which  has  as  its  core  a patrilineage, 
is  extremely  flexible  in  size  and  therefore  not 
disrupted  by  seasonal  variability  in  resources. 
By  this,  I mean  that  each  lineage-bound  splits 
into  smaller  band  units  during  a part  of  the 
year  and  reaggregates,  as  the  hunting  im- 
proves, to  again  attain  maximal  size  in  May. 

Marriage  practices  among  the  Birhor  are 
fairly  simple.  There  is  only  one  clearly  stated 
rule:  a person  does  not  marry  a relative.  Of 
course  there  is  more  to  the  situation  in  prac- 
tice. A person  also  does  not  marry  a non- 
relative  if  raised  in  the  same  band.  Brother’s 
wife’s  “sister”  is  marriageable,  and  in  fact  is 
almost  inevitably  chosen  when  available.  Al- 
though a number  of  forms  of  marriage  are 
named  and  can  be  described  by  the  Birhor, 
only  one  kind  commonly  occurs;  this  is  sister 
exchange.  Often  a lineage  “sister”  will  be 
used. 

The  prevalence  of  this  practice  seems  to  be 
connected  with  the  difficulty  of  arranging 
marriage.  Most  bands  in  the  near  vicinity  are 
ruled  out  as  they  are  related  by  marriages  in 
the  previous  one  or  two  generations.  The  pri- 
mary interest  of  the  elder  males  is  to  provide  a 
wife  for  a son  in  order  to  keep  him  in  the  band. 
Therefore,  daughters  become  important  in 
an  exchange  for  daughters-in-law.  Since  the 
bands  between  whom  the  marriage  is  being 
arranged  are  at  least  semi-strangers,  and  thus 
not  too  well  trusted,  the  equivalence  of  the  ex- 
change is  assured  by  immediate  exchange  of 
“sisters”  between  two  men  who  are  seeking 
spouses.  Once  this  has  been  successful,  other 
marriages  are  easily  arranged  by  similar  ex- 
changes between  these  bands  for  the  remainder 
of  the  generation.  This  practice  is  also  en- 
couraged by  the  fact  that  women  are  less 
likely  to  run  away  from  a band  if  they  have 
“sisters”  who  are  also  residing  there. 


Marriage  arrangement  is  also  rendered 
difficult  by  the  fact  that  market  items  such  as 
cloth  and  perhaps  cheap  jewelry  are  required 
as  wedding  gifts.  In  these  exchanges,  there  is  a 
reasonable  equivalence,  but  the  fact  that  they 
must  be  made  seems  to  insure  that  a man  with- 
out support  from  several  families  cannot 
arrange  a marriage.  For  this  reason,  orphans 
often  marry  older  widows,  where  such  ex- 
changes are  not  required.  Such  men  will  also 
accept  residence  in  the  wife’s  father’s  band  in 
return  for  a wife,  although  such  instances  are 
not  common. 

Such  marriage  practices  deviate  from  those 
set  out  in  the  model  given  in  the  introductory 
paragraphs  of  this  material.  But  they  deviate 
in  predictable  ways.  A strong  tendency  toward 
unilocal  residence  is  present  and  exogamy  is 
present.  The  model,  however,  requires  unilocal 
residence  and  exogamy  by  means  of  cross- 
cousin marriage  to  maintain  ties  of  affiliation 
where  stable  territorial  relations  are  present. 

Among  the  Birhor  the  possibility  of  terri- 
toriality is  completely  ruled  out  as  mentioned 
earlier.  Therefore,  for  various  reasons,  bands 
do  tend  to  “drift”  over  long  periods  of  time, 
although  they  prefer  to  remain  in  a familiar 
area.  Given  these  circumstances,  the  rule  that 
one  does  not  marry  a relative  maximizes  the 
probability  of  developing  kin  ties  with  any  new 
band  encountered  in  the  course  of  migration. 
This  means  that  the  marriage  rule  in  practice 
among  the  Birhor  effects  the  maintenance  of 
marriage  affiliation  with  surrounding  groups 
in  a long-standing  situation  of  some  territorial 
fluidity,  much  as  does  the  rule  of  cross-cousin 
marriage  in  a situation  of  territorial  stability. 

Similar  marriage  rules  whose  effect  is  to  pro- 
duce obligate  exogamy  between  territorially 
autonomous  groups  have  been  recorded  for 
many  hunting  societies.  It  must  be  emphasized 
that  this  practice  has  to  be  viewed  as  different 
in  some  respects  from  exogamic  practices  be- 
tween clans  or  other  social  units  which  exist 
within  the  context  of  a supraordinate  political 
organization. 

Were  it  not  for  its  widespread  ethnographic 
documentation,  such  a system  of  territorial 
exogamy  would  seem  intuitively  not  very 
likely,  precisely  because  the  units  involved  in 
the  exchange  are  territorially  autonomous. 
One  would  expect  marriages  between  such  units 


Williams  The  Birhor  of  India  and  Some  Comments  on  Band  Organization  131 


to  be  more  difficult  to  arrange  than  marriages 
within  such  units.  In  effect,  the  participants  are 
sending  daughters  to,  and  are  expecting 
daughters-in-law  from,  groups  over  which  they 
have  no  control  except  that  via  sentiments 
which  might  exist  as  a result  of  prior  exchanges 
of  this  kind.  Further,  such  obligate  exogamy,  to 
my  knowledge,  is  not  found  operating  between 
territorially  exogamous  societies  except  in 
hunting  bands.  In  the  smallest  tribal  societies 
such  as  those  of  highland  New  Guinea,  we  find 
a certain,  perhaps  sizable,  percentage  of  mar- 
riage between  territorial  groups;  in  royal 
lineages  we  find  a great  deal  of  marriage  be- 
tween territorial  groups.  This  may  be  function- 
ally equivalent  in  many  ways  to  exogamy  in 
hunting  bands;  that  is,  it  serves  to  filiate 
otherwise  autonomous  groups. 

If  such  is  the  function  of  marriage  at  the 
band  level  of  social  organization,  we  can  draw 
further  inferences  concerning  band  organiza- 
tion. In  human  society  it  is  not  always  possible 
to  locate  a strictly  endogamous  group.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  an  exogamous  unit  can  always 
be  located.  It  may  be  exogamic  in  both 
prescription  and  practice,  or  it  may  be  so 
only  in  practice.  A further  implication  of 
marriage  as  filiation  is  that  the  exogamous 
unit  must  be  able  to  maintain  cohesion  in- 
definitely without  the  necessity  of  reinforcing 
this  cohesion  by  marriages  within  the  unit. 
From  this  point,  two  questions  immediately 
suggest  themselves:  First,  what  is  the  largest 
group  in  a kinship-based  society  having  a hunt- 
ing economy  in  which  social  cohesion  can  be 
maintained  indefinitely  without  internally  con- 
tracted marriages?  Second,  what  is  the 
minimum  size  of  the  exogamous  group  which 
can  maintain  such  a system  indefinitely? 

The  answer  to  the  latter  question  can  be 
given  by  considering  a simple  demographic 
requirement.  That  is,  the  exogamous  group 
must,  on  the  average,  provide  marriage  con- 
nections with  the  average  number  of  terri- 
torially contiguous  groups — as  a minimum. 
This  must  also  take  into  account  vagaries  of  the 
sex  ratio  and  other  stochastic  processes  which 
will  raise  the  minimum  size  above  that  re- 
quired on  the  basis  of  a strictly  mechanical 
model  of  man.  Since  the  number  of  nearest 
neighbors,  considering  a large  area,  will  be 
between  5-6  groups,  this  sets  a fairly  uniform 


minimum  size,  a size  I suggested  earlier  as 
being  35-75  individuals. 

With  regard  to  the  question  of  maximum 
exogamic  band  size,  I would  guess  from 
reading  ethnographic  accounts  and  from  my 
own  work  that  this  average  maximum  size  will 
not  be  far  from  the  average  minimum  size. 
The  suggestion  is  that  this  band  grouping 
which  is  exogamic  readily  tends  to  fission 
when  it  is  of  such  a size  as  to  be  able  to  operate 
as  two  separate  bands,  given  the  minimum 
size  criterion. 

If  this  is  the  case,  it  is  of  great  interest  to  the 
archeologist  and  the  physical  anthropologist  as 
well  as  to  the  ethnologist.  Since  the  number 
of  nearest  neighbors  is  a geometrical  “given,” 
it  is  the  same  for  25,000  years  ago  as  today — 
the  same  for  a rich  environment  as  for  a poor 
environment.  If  there  is  not  a great  difference 
between  the  maximum  and  minimum  size  of 
such  groups,  then  the  archeologist,  with  an 
estimate  of  population  density,  should  be  able 
to  say  what  minimum  distance  between  sites 
would  be  expected  to  show  culturally  differen- 
tiated elements.  If  such  predictions  can  be 
confirmed  archeologically,  the  next  question 
will  be  to  ask  how  far  back  they  can  be 
confirmed. 

For  the  physical  anthropologist,  the  impli- 
cations are  clear.  If  such  a system  existed  in 
Paleolithic  populations,  the  rate  of  inbreeding 
and  of  gene  flow  are  given  directly  from  such 
a model.  Inbreeding  and  gene  flow  are  impor- 
tant factors  in  determining  the  rate  at  which 
populations  can  become  physically  differen- 
tiated and  the  ability  of  populations  to 
maintain  genetic  polymorphisms. 

This  rather  simplified  hypothesis  of  factors 
determining  band  size  in  such  groups  can  be, 
if  it  is  a part  of  the  story  at  all,  only  a part. 
The  Birhor,  as  I have  indicated,  are  patrilocal 
and  exogamous  but  not  territorial,  and  they 
do  not  practice  cousin  marriage.  Yet  the 
Birhor  clearly  strive  to  maintain  their  groups 
above  a certain  size.  The  critical  minimum 
seems  to  be  somewhere  just  below  25  indi- 
viduals. At  such  a level,  factors  other  than  the 
demography  of  marriage  exchange  apparently 
come  into  play.  These  may  be  ecological,  they 
may  even  be  psychological  factors.  In  any 
event  they  seem  to  need  fuller  exploration  in 
the  studies  of  ethnologists. 


!5- 


The  Importance 

of  Flux  in  Two  Hunting  Societies 


COI.IN  M.  TURNBULL 


Introduction 

This  paper  examines  the  flexibility  of  social 
organization  characteristic  of  two  East  African 
small-scale  societies,  the  Mbuti  Pygmies  of  the 
tropical  rain  forest  of  the  northeast  Congo 
and  the  Ik  of  the  dry,  open  mountains  near  the 
borders  of  Uganda,  Kenya,  and  Sudan.  Both 
the  Ik  and  Mbuti,  as  hunters  and  gatherers, 
work  within  their  respective  environments 
rather  than  attempting  to  alter  them.  Because 
neither  is  under  the  rigid  control  a truly 
marginal  economy  might  impose,  each  is  able 
to  maintain  a fluid  band  composition,  a loose 
form  of  social  structure,  and  to  utilize  flux  as  a 
highly  effective  social  mechanism. 

By  flux  I mean  the  constant  changeover  of 
personnel  between  local  groups  and  the  fre- 
quent shifts  of  campsites  through  the  seasons. 
This  apparent  instability  is,  in  fact,  the  very 
mechanism  that  gives  these  societies  their  co- 
hesion. Both  the  Mbuti  and  the  Ik  are  com- 
posed of  many  constantly  shifting  elements 
forming  established  patterns.  Flux  is  expressed 
as  recurrent  fission  and  fusion  which  affects  the 
composition  of  local  bands.  A similar  state  of 
flux  is  found  in  a number  of  hunting  and 
gathering  societies,  such  as  the  Hadza  and 
Bushmen,  and  may  be  characteristic  of  the 
majority  of  peoples  described  at  the  sym- 


posium. Before  undertaking  a comparison  of 
flux  in  Mbuti  and  Ik  society,  a brief  ethno- 
graphic sketch  of  each  will  be  given. 

Mbuti 

The  Mbuti  Pygmies  have  been  previously  des- 
cribed by  Schebesta  (1938-50),  Putnam 
(1948),  and  Turnbull  (igtfi,  1965a,  1965b, 
1965c).  They  live  by  hunting  and  gathering  in 
the  interior  of  the  Ituri  forest.  There  are  two 
economic  divisions:  the  net-hunters  who  live  in 
large  camps  of  seven  to  thirty  families,  based  on 
communal  or  cooperative  hunting,  and  the 
archers,  who  live  in  much  smaller  groups,  and 
who  hunt  individually  with  bow  and  arrow. 
The  residential  units  of  both  net-hunters  and 
archers  constantly  change  in  composition  as 
individuals  and  families  circulate  between  the 
territorially  based  bands. 

The  total  population  of  Mbuti  appears  to 
stand  at  about  40,000  and  all  of  these  are  more 
or  less  closely  associated  with  their  Sudanic 
and  Bantu  neighbors,  the  Lese,  Mangbelu,  and 
Bira.  This  association  has  existed  for  at  least 
several  hundred  years  and  as  a consequence 
all  pygmies  speak  only  the  languages  of  the 
village  cultivators  adjacent  to  them.  What 
makes  the  continuation  of  their  hunting  life 


132 


Turnbull  The  Importance  of  Flux  in  Two  Hunting  Societies  133 


possible  is  the  existence  of  the  forest  itself, 
which  their  neighbors  fear  to  penetrate  and  to 
which  the  pygmies  have  become  closely 
adapted.  Their  adaptation  to  the  forest  is  con- 
spicuously expressed  in  their  technology  and 
subsistence  but  is  also  deeply  rooted  in  their 
ideology. 

The  Mbuti  of  the  Epulu  area,  with  whom  I 
did  field  work  in  1954  and  1957-58,  practiced 
no  agriculture,  although  they  did  engage  in 
trade  with  the  villagers,  and  spent  brief 
periods  living  with  these  neighbors  and  eating 
their  foods. 

The  villagers  regard  the  Pygmies  as  their 
vassals,  but,  as  I have  argued  elsewhere,  the 
Pygmies  manipulate  this  relationship  to  their 
advantage  and  maintain  their  primary  orien- 
tation to  the  forest. 


Ik 

Very  little  is  known  about  the  Ik  (Gullivers, 

1 953  5 Wayland,  1931),  and  to  all  outward 
appearances,  they  are  predominantly  culti- 
vators. Yet,  because  one  year  out  of  every  four 
or  five  brings  a drought  which  destroys  all 
crops,  the  Ik  periodically  abandon  cultivation 
and  revert  to  hunting.  Thus,  although  they 
are  cultivators  for  75  per  cent  of  the  time,  for 
the  remaining  25  per  cent  they  are  100  per 
cent  hunters  and  gatherers. 

The  Ik,  who  number  somewhat  over  1,500, 
have  previously  been  known  as  Teuso  or 
Teuth,  a name  they  reject  as  being  applied  to 
them  only  by  the  Dodos.  They  distinguish 
themselves  from  all  pastoral  tribes,  such  as 
Dodos,  Turkana,  and  Karimojong,  and  they 
associate  themselves  with  nearby  hunting 
tribes,  such  as  the  Niangea  and  Napore,  and 
even  the  more  distant  Tepes.  They  do  so, 
despite  a mutual  unintelligibility  of  languages, 
by  describing  themselves  and  their  fellow 
hunters  as  kwarikik,  meaning  “mountain 
people”;  but  they  claim  no  closer  connection 
with  the  other  “kwarikik”  than  the  common 
mountain  environment.  There  is  no  thought  of 
common  origin.  Neverthless,  though  separ- 
ated by  hundreds  of  miles,  the  environmental 
factor  seems  important  enough  to  all  kwarikik 
for  them  to  recognize  and  feel  a unity,  against 
all  others  who  are  not  mountain  people. 


The  Ik  live  during  the  agricultural  cycle  in 
small,  isolated,  heavily  stockaded  villages  that 
are  almost  as  discrete  as  their  hunting  bands. 
Even  within  each  village  there  are  numerous 
divisions  that  prevent  any  solidification  into 
effective  corporate  units  much  larger  than  the 
nuclear  family.  The  divisions  and  subdivisions 
do  not  necessarily  follow  any  lines  of  kinship, 
nor  are  they  permanent.  The  groups  may  not 
even  last  the  maximum  duration  of  any  one 
village  site,  namely,  two  years.  Clan  member- 
ship is  only  significant  as  a convenience  for  a 
rough  reckoning  of  whether  or  not  a proposed 
marriage  is  allowable.  Marriage  within  the 
clan,  however,  does  occasionally  take  place, 
and  then  the  clan  is  said  to  have  divided.  One 
side  of  the  dividing  line  is  called  “big,”  and  the 
other  “small.”  These  features  are  all  directly 
comparable  to  the  Mbuti  band,  and  when  the 
Ik  village  converts  itself  into  a hunting  and 
gathering  band,  the  same  principles  of  organi- 
zation operate  with  equal  effectiveness,  and 
equal  fluidity. 

Comparisons 

Environment 

The  environments  of  the  Mbuti  and  Ik  con- 
trast sharply.  The  forest  of  the  Mbuti,  for  the 
most  part,  is  flat  with  occasional  hilly  regions. 
Its  climate  varies  scarcely  at  all  throughout  the 
year.  The  maximum  annual  temperature 
range  is  20c,  and  the  normal  daily  variation  is 
usually  far  less,  perhaps  50  (between  75°  and 
8o°F.).  Rain  falls  evenly  over  the  entire  area, 
and  is  evenly  spread  throughout  the  year. 
Game  and  vegetable  supplies  are  similarly 
uniform  in  distribution,  and  are  abundant 
throughout  the  area.  There  is  nothing  that 
makes  one  part  of  the  forest  more  or  less 
desirable  than  any  other  part  at  any  time  of 
the  year. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  mountain  territory 
of  the  Ik  is  for  the  most  part  arid,  though 
studded  with  richly  wooded  valleys  and  gorges. 
Some  areas  are  much  more  wooded  while 
others  may  verge  on  desert.  Far  from  the 
absence  of  seasons  characteristic  of  the  Ituri 
forest,  the  Ik  habitat  is  one  of  violent  climatic 
extremes.  During  the  summer,  the  sun 


1 34  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

scorches  the  ground  dry  with  its  fierce  in- 
tensity, while  in  the  winter,  the  clouds  obscure 
the  sun,  making  the  air  cold  and  damp. 
Violent  gales  blow  up  and  down  the  valleys, 
sweeping  the  torrential  rains  with  them.  Dry 
gorges  become  swollen  rivers  in  minutes  and, 
as  quickly,  become  dry  again.  Small,  tightly 
localized  areas  can  become  devastated  by 
wind  and  flood,  while  all  around  these  areas, 
it  may  be  calm  and  dry.  A region  that  fares 
well  one  year  may  fare  badly  the  next.  The 
game  population  is  seasonally  nomadic  and 
edible  vegetable  supplies  are  tightly  localized 
rather  than  evenly  distributed. 

In  light  of  this  contrast  between  the  Mbuti 
and  the  Ik  environments,  a curious  feature 
emerges.  The  Mbuti  treat  their  stable  environ- 
ment as  though  it  were  unstable,  creating 
imaginary  seasons  of  plenty  and  scarcity,  while 
the  Ik  treat  their  highly  unstable  environment 
as  though  it  were  stable,  and  consequently 
bring  upon  themselves  alternating  periods  of 
real  plenty  and  scarcity. 

However,  it  should  be  stressed  that  the  usual 
notion  that  hunters  live  a marginal  existence 
does  not  apply  in  either  case.  The  economies, 
at  first  glance,  may  give  the  impression  of 
being  precarious,  but  in  fact  this  is  not  the 
case.  Famine  or  anything  approaching  it  is 
utterly  unknown  to  the  Mbuti  who  have  an 
axiom  that  “the  only  hungry  Mbuti  is  a lazy 
Mbuti.” 

The  same  axiom  would  have  applied  to  the 
Ik,  up  to  the  drastic  encroachments  of  both  the 
central  administration  and  the  neighboring 
pastoral  tribes  in  recent  years  which  have 
hemmed  them  in,  confined  them,  and  ham- 
pered their  traditional  economy  in  every 
possible  way.  Yet  even  now  it  would  be  true 
to  say  that  the  only  hungry  Ik  is  one  who  is 
unable  or  unwilling  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  the 
various  armed  forces  that  forbid  them  access 
to  major  portions  of  their  former  subsistence 
range. 

Land  Use  and  Group  Size 

Naturally,  the  methods  of  exploitation  of  the 
resources  vary  according  to  the  environment, 
as  does  the  hunting  organization  and  the 
gathering  pattern.  Both  Mbuti  and  Ik  hunting 
bands  fluctuate  in  size  from  seven  to  thirty 


nuclear  families,  but  whereas  an  Mbuti  band 
is  territorially  circumscribed,  and  is  so  de- 
fined, it  is  much  less  so  with  the  Ik.  An  Mbuti 
band  can  comfortably  confine  its  movements 
from  one  year  to  the  next  within  too  square 
miles,  due  to  the  uniform  distribution  of  the 
game  in  the  forest.  An  Ik  band  is  forced  by 
climatic  fluctuations  to  undertake  seasonal 
movements  over  large  areas,  up  to  about 
10,000  square  miles. 

Differences  due  to  migration  patterns  of 
game  and  to  seasonal  differences  in  the  avail- 
ability of  vegetable  foods  have  social  conse- 
quences as  well.  The  Mbuti  band,  as  a 
territorial  unit,  retains  independence  for  most 
of  the  year  and  rarely  needs  to  share  its  terri- 
tory with  another  band,  while  the  Ik  bands 
often  come  together  in  larger  concentrations 
in  order  to  exploit  the  localized  resources. 

Subsistence  Techniques 

What  is  more  remarkable  than  the  differences 
between  these  two  areas  is  the  range  of  sub- 
sistence organization  within  each  area.  Among 
both  the  Mbuti  and  the  Ik,  two  styles  of  hunt- 
ing organization  are  in  use.  The  Mbuti  are 
divided  into  net-hunters  and  archers,  and  the 
Ik  into  net-hunters  and  spear-hunters 

Regarding  the  Mbuti,  there  is  no  environ- 
mental reason  why  half  of  them  should  be 
net-hunters  and  the  other  half  archers,  al- 
though there  may  be  some  historical  explana- 
tion. Nonetheless,  the  forest  is  so  divided  and 
each  division  regards  the  other  as  somewhat 
quaint  and  wonders  how  the  other  can  survive. 
Yet  on  investigation  it  became  clear  that  each 
half  is  well  versed  in  the  other’s  hunting  tech- 
nique; visitors  from  one  division  to  the  other 
have  no  difficulty  at  all  in  adapting  to  the 
different  hunting  methods.  And  it  is  strange 
indeed  that  in  the  same  environment  and  with 
equally  adequate  technologies,  the  net-hunters 
regard  the  brief  honey  season  as  a time  of 
plenty,  while  the  archers  see  it  as  a time  of 
scarcity.  Each  group  takes  appropriate  mea- 
sures to  meet  the  perceived  situation,  the  net- 
hunters  splitting  into  small  units,  and  the 
archers  congregating  into  larger  ones! 

Among  the  Ik,  it  is  equally  difficult  to  dis- 
cern why  some  should  hold  to  the  net-hunt  (of 
the  Acholi  type)  while  others  say  that  hunting 


Turnbull  The  Importance  of  Flux  in  Two  Hunting  Societies 


with  spears  is  more  effective.  Again,  there 
appears  to  be  no  discernible  differences  in 
habitat  which  would  explain  the  different 
styles  of  hunting. 

Part  of  the  explanation  may  lie  in  the  fact 
that  in  both  cases,  the  environment  is  generous 
enough  to  allow  alternative  hunting  tech- 
niques. In  common  with  other  tropical  hunter- 
gatherers  discussed  at  the  symposium,  gather- 
ing of  vegetable  foods  is  fully  as  important  a 
factor  in  diet  as  is  hunting.  Although  hunting 
is  a more  prestigious  activity,  gathering  strate- 
gies play  a large  part  in  determining  the  band’s 
daily  and  seasonal  movements.  Even  in  the 
direction  of  their  all-male  spear  hunt,  the  Ik 
take  the  distribution  of  vegetable  foods  into 
consideration  and  women  are  called  on  for 
advice.  Thus  a common  basis  of  abundant 
vegetable  food  sources  may  make  possible  alter- 
nate and  equally  felicitious  styles  of  hunting. 

The  Importance  of  Flux 

Among  the  Mbuti,  the  constant  process  of 
fission  and  fusion  that  characterizes  every 
band,  is  more  predictable  than  among  the  Ik. 
The  flux  appears  as  a systematic  pattern  which 
I have  analyzed  elsewhere  (1965a,  1965b, 
1965c).  The  focal  point  of  the  process  is  the 
honey  season,  during  which  the  net-hunters 
spread  out  into  fragmented  subbands,  some- 
times uniting  siblings,  sometimes  dividing 
them,  but  always  separating  antagonistic  ele- 
ments. At  the  end  of  the  honey  season,  the  band 
begins  to  re-form,  carefully  avoiding  any  lines 
of  fracture  that  remain  unhealed.  The  net- 
hunters  normally  form  bands  larger  than  those 
of  the  archers,  for  a net-hunt  demands 
cooperation  between  a minimum  of  six  or 
seven  nuclear  families,  and  allows  a maximum 
of  thirty.  The  honey  season,  they  say,  is  a time 
of  such  plenty  that  the  game  can  easily  be 
caught  by  hand,  and  so  there  is  no  need  for 
the  large  cooperative  net-hunt.  During  the 
previous  ten  months,  the  necessity  of  constant 
cooperation,  and  the  proximity  and  intimacy 
in  which  all  band  members  must  live  with  one 
another,  invariably  gives  rise  to  numerous 
latent  antagonisms  and  even  a few  open  hos- 
tilities. If  hostilities  were  to  go  unchecked,  it 
would  destroy  the  essential  unity  of  the  band 


135 

and  consequently  ruin  the  success  of  the  hunt. 
Thus  the  honey  season  is  an  important  safety- 
valve,  allowing  for  the  radical  reconstitution 
of  face-to-face  groups. 

The  archers,  in  exactly  the  same  environ- 
ment, do  precisely  the  reverse.  They  hunt  in 
maximal  bands  only  during  the  honey  season, 
and  for  the  rest  of  the  year  split  up  into  minor 
and  ultimately  minimal  segments.  Their  stated 
rationale  is  that  the  honey  season  is  a time  of 
poor  hunting,  and  thus,  maximum  cooperation 
is  demanded.  The  reality  is  that  whereas  the 
net-hunting  band  is  ofnecessity  united  through- 
out the  bulk  of  the  year,  the  archer  band  is 
splintered  into  tiny  segments,  sometimes  only 
two  or  three  families,  each  independent  of 
others.  The  ideal  number  of  archers  for  either 
tracking  or  ambushing  game  is  three;  five 
would  already  be  felt  as  unwieldy.  The  com- 
position of  these  small  segments  does  not 
remain  constant  throughout  the  year,  anymore 
than  does  the  composition  of  the  net-hunting 
band,  but  the  net-hunters  must  endure  close 
association  with  much  greater  numbers  of 
people  than  do  the  archers. 

When  hostilities  come  into  the  open,  the 
solution  is  for  one  or  the  other  disputant  to 
pack  up  and  leave.  But  the  very  size  of  the 
minimal  archer  segments  means  that  the  heal- 
ing of  internal  disputes  is  of  much  less  concern 
to  them  during  the  honey  season  than  it  is  to 
the  net-hunters.  The  problem  for  the  archers 
is  how  to  maintain  any  semblance  of  band 
unity  under  such  conditions,  and  band  unity 
must  be  expressed,  for  territory  is  defined  by 
bands,  just  as  bands  are  defined  by  territory. 
It  is  essential  that  territorial  boundaries  should 
be  known  so  as  to  avoid  any  conflicts  that 
might  arise  due  to  allegations  of  trespass  or 
poaching.  The  need,  then,  is  for  each  band  to 
draw  together  all  its  scattered  segments  and  to 
act  as  a band,  within  its  territory,  for  at  least 
some  part  of  the  annual  cycle.  On  the  excuse 
that  hunting  is  poor  at  the  honey  season  (I 
could  find  no  justification  for  the  excuse, 
though  I prefer  to  leave  it  an  open  issue),  the 
archers  of  each  band  gather  together  and  par- 
ticipate in  the  begbe,  or  communal  beat,  which 
in  technique  is  similar  to  the  net-hunt. 

The  Ik  band  is  similarly  in  a constant  state 
of  flux,  and  again,  its  composition  is  de- 
termined primarily  by  non-economic  factors. 


136  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

The  process,  though  less  predictable  than  that 
of  the  Mbuti,  clearly  does  not  follow  any 
unilinear  descent  pattern  in  fission.  Age  and 
territoriality  are  prime  factors  in  the  regulation 
and  definition  of  the  band,  and  the  conflict- 
resolving aspects  of  its  shifting  composition 
arc  predominant.  The  Ik  also  have  a honey 
season,  which  comes  at  a time  of  general  abun- 
dance. Communal  activity  breaks  down,  even 
during  the  agricultural  cycle,  and  major 
changes  in  band  composition  arc  likely  to  take 
place  in  adjustment  to  political  factors  by 
separating  antagonistic  segments.  The  honey 
season  is  followed  by  a termite  season  which 
breaks  the  band  into  its  minimal  segments  and 
takes  these  far  afield — during  the  hunting  year. 
At  the  end  of  this  season,  the  bands  gradually 
re-form  into  agricultural  units,  if  rain  promises 
well,  and  cooperate  in  the  building  of  new  vil- 
lages and  the  hoeing  of  new  fields.  However, 
each  village  retains  the  internal  divisions  of 
the  hunting  bands,  though,  as  with  the  Mbuti, 
the  lk  seldom  revert  to  previous  groupings. 

Political  Authority 

There  is  no  form  of  centralized  authority  in 
cither  society,  apart  from  the  nominal  author- 
ity vested  by  the  European  administrations  in 
their  appointed  headmen.  This  lack  is  perhaps 
at  first  surprising,  considering  that  both  Mbuti 
and  Ik  are  divided  into  virtually  autonomous 
bands  with  ho  formal  system  of  interrelation- 
ship, and  that  each  band  is  constituted  in  such 
a way  as  to  create  the  minimum  of  cohesion 
within  itself.  Even  nuclear  families  are  not  the 
solid  social  entities  we  might  expect  them  to 
be.  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  are  the  threads 
that  hold  each  society  together  as  such,  for 
despite  the  apparent  lack  of  cohesion,  both  the 
Ik  and  the  Mbuti  are  strongly  united,  as 
peoples,  in  opposition  to  their  neighbors. 

On  the  contrary,  in  each  case  there  is  a 
strong  hostility  felt  towards  any  individual  who 
aspires  to  a position  of  authority  or  leadership. 
Hostility  is  even  shown  towards  those  who, 
without  any  such  aspirations,  are  plainly 
better  fitted  to  lead  than  others  by  virtue  of 
sheer  ability. 

Part  of  the  answer  lies  again  in  the  environ- 
ment, for  while  it  determines  certain  aspects 


of  the  mode  of  economic  exploitation,  within 
that  general  framework  it  leaves  a large  margin 
of  latitude  and  always  allows  the  certainty  of, 
at  the  very  least,  a sufficiency  of  food,  if  not  a 
surplus.  This  assurance  of  food  is  clearly  seen 
in  the  unpredictability  of  the  daily  hunt.  Even 
when  game  is  known  to  be  close,  a band  (in 
either  society)  may  well  at  the  last  moment 
decide  not  to  go  hunting  at  all.  It  may  find  an 
excuse,  such  as  a trivial  dispute,  or  it  may  not 
bother  to  find  any.  The  result  may  even  be 
hunger  on  that  day.  Yet  when  already  sated 
with  successive  days  of  good  hunting  and  feast- 
ing, a band  may  decide  to  set  off  in  the  most 
unlikely  direction  and  return,  at  the  end  of  a 
long  and  arduous  day,  with  nothing  to  show 
for  it.  Sometimes  rain  will  make  hunting  im- 
practical, and  again  hunger  might  ensue  since 
neither  society  (the  Ik  considered  in  their 
hunting  cycle,  here)  will  store  or  keep  anything 
for  the  morrow.  After  two  or  three  consecutive 
rainy  days,  which  is  about  the  maximum  that 
can  be  expected,  a fine  day  may  dawn  and  find 
the  band  still  determined  to  stay  in  camp  and 
attend  to  unimportant  chores. 

A band  may  hunt  as  a single  unit,  or  it  can 
split  up  and  hunt  as  several  independent  units. 
There  is  no  predicting  which  it  will  do  among 
the  Ik,  where  seasonal  variations  are  strongly 
marked,  yet  among  the  Mbuti  where  there  are 
virtually  no  seasons  (except  for  the  two  months 
of  the  years  during  which  honey  is  available  in 
addition  to  all  the  usual  food  supplies)  the  pro- 
cess of  fission  and  fusion  is  clearly  predictable. 

It  all  seems  to  be  a rather  topsy-turvy  world 
for  both  Mbuti  and  Ik,  where  the  things  that 
happen  are  those  that  could  least  reasonably 
be  expected.  I am  perhaps  somewhat  over- 
emphasizing the  lack  of  organization,  but  here 
that  seems  important,  for  all  too  often  hunters 
and  gatherers  are  expected  to  set  a shining 
example  of  social  organization  at  its  simplest 
and  its  clearest,  and  to  illustrate  with  crystal- 
line lucidity  the  fundamental  principles  upon 
which  all  respectable  social  systems  are  based. 

The  fact  is  that  both  the  Mbuti  and  the  Ik 
work  within  their  permissive  environments 
rather  than  attempting  to  control  them.  They 
are  unencumbered  by  the  rigid  imperatives 
that  would  be  imposed  by  a truly  harsh  en- 
vironment. Thus  they  are  able  to  maintain  a 
fluid  band  composition  and  a loose  social 


Turnbull  The  Importance  of  Flux  in  Two  Hunting  Societies 


structure;  and  are  able  to  utilize  this  flux  as  a 
highly  effective  social  mechanism,  providing 
scope  for  action  in  all  aspects  of  social  life. 

Conclusions 

In  summing  up,  I want  to  stress  three  points. 
First  it  seems  clear  that  it  is  environmental 
permissiveness  and  not  environmental  rigor 
that  makes  possible  the  system  of  flux.  Second, 
the  major  function  of  flux  is  not  ecological 
adaptation  but  what  could  be  called  political 
adaptation.  And  third,  the  fission  and  fusion 
of  individuals  and  groups  does  not  follow  lines 
of  kinship. 

The  relative  abundance  of  food  that  obtains 
in  both  traditional  situations  permits  the  system 
of  flux.  It  allows  for  the  fluidity  of  composition 
that  affords  a simple  means  of  averting  disrup- 
tion without  imposing  a legal  mechanism  that 
would  in  itself  be  even  more  disruptive  to  the 
total  society.  The  predictability  of  food  supplies 
allows  for  neighboring  bands  to  plan  their 
movements  so  as  to  avoid  conflict. 


137 

It  is  plain  that  in  each  case  the  process  of 
fission  and  fusion  follows-  lines  of  dissent  rather 
than  those  of  descent,  and  that  the  major 
function  is  conflict-resolving.  At  no  time 
during  the  process  can  any  trace  of  the  concept 
of  unilinear  descent  or  affiliation  be  found. 
The  band  can  only  be  defined  as  that  group  of 
individuals  living  and  hunting  within  recog- 
nized territorial  boundaries  at  a given  time.  A 
cross-cutting  loyalty  is  formed  by  attachment 
and  cooperation  between  age-mates,  age  being 
the  vital  bond  that  takes  clear  precedence  over 
kinship,  among  both  the  Mbuti  and  the  Ik. 

Another  function  of  flux  might  be  said  to  be 
religious,  for,  by  deemphasizing  stability  in 
interpersonal  relations,  the  process  throws  the 
people  into  closer  recognition  of  the  one  con- 
stant in  their  lives,  the  environment  and  its 
life-giving  qualities.  Under  such  conditions  of 
flux  where  band  and  even  family  relations  are 
often  brittle  and  fragmentary,  the  environ- 
ment, in  general,  and  one’s  own  hunting  terri- 
tory in  particular,  become  for  each  individual 
the  one  reliable  and  rewarding  focus  of  his 
attention,  his  loyalty,  and  his  devotion. 


Southeastern  Australia  : 
Level  of  Social  Organization 


ARNOLD  R.  PILLING 


In  1889,  when  only  those  aboriginal  tribes  in 
the  eastern  half  of  Australia  were  well  known, 
Alfred  William  Howitt,  one  of  the  great  pio- 
neers of  Australian  ethnology,  proposed  that  the 
well-watered  coastal  areas  of  Australia  had  an 
“advanced  social  development.”  Howitt’s 
nineteenth-century  evolutionary  reasoning  is 
best  expressed  in  his  own  words: 

With  the  exception  of  that  part  of  North- 
Eastern  Queensland  where  the  Kamilaroi  type 
touches  the  coast,  the  whole  of  the  coast  tracts, 
speaking  broadly,  between  the  Great  Dividing 
Range  and  the  sea,  both  in  Queensland  and  New 
South  Wales,  and  between  the  Murray  River  and 
the  sea  in  Victoria  and  South  Australia,  were 
occupied  by  communities  having  abnormal  types 
of  class  system  which  in  most  cases  count  descent 
through  the  male  line.  These  coast  tracts,  taken  as  a 
whole,  are  the  best  watered  and  the  most  fertile 
parts  of  Australia,  and  moreover,  the  richest  in  ani- 
mals and  plant  food  for  an  aboriginal  population. 

This  coincidence  of  advanced  social  develop- 
ment with  fertility  of  country  is  not  without  some 
significance.  The  most  backward-standing  types 
of  social  organization,  having  descent  through  the 
mother  and  an  archaic  communal  marriage,  exist 
in  the  dry  and  desert  country,  the  more  developed 
Kamilaroi  type,  having  descent  through  the 
mother,  but  a general  absence  of  the  Pirauru 

138 


marriage  practice  is  found  in  the  better  watered 
tracts  which  are  the  sources  of  all  the  great  rivers 
of  East  Australia;  while  the  most  developed  types 
having  individual  marriage  and  in  which,  in 
almost  all  cases,  descent  is  counted  through  the 
father,  are  found  along  the  coasts  where  there  is 
the  most  permanent  supply  of  water  and  most 
food  (Howitt,  1889a,  pp.  33-34). 

For  those  unfamiliar  with  the  ethnographic 
descriptions  available  in  1889,  it  should  be 
stated  that  the  “Pirauru  marriage  practice”  is 
a variety  of  ceremonial  sexual  license  reported 
for  the  Dieri  of  the  arid  Lake  Eyre  area  of 
northeastern  South  Australia,  which  Howitt 
and  others  in  that  era  interpreted  as  the  only 
occurrence,  surviving  into  modern  times,  of 
the  hypothetical  original  form  of  human  mat- 
ing, so-called  “group  marriage,”  in  which  a 
group  of  males  was  alleged  to  be  married  to  a 
group  of  females. 

Today  most  anthropologists  reject  the  Dieri 
pirauru  as  evidence  of  group  marriage;  in  fact, 
during  the  twentieth  century,  group  marriage 
has  been  rejected  by  the  majority  of  social 
anthropologists  as  an  ancestoral  form  of  mar- 
riage. Likewise  dismissed  as  invalid  is  any 
assertion  that  either  matrilineal  descent  or 
patrilineal  descent,  by  itself,  may  be  taken  as 
evidence  of  an  advanced  social  stage. 


Pilling  Southeastern  Australia : Level  of  Social  Organization  139 


let  there  still  lingers  on  the  suggestion  that 
southeast  Australia,  the  area  specified  by 
Howitt, in  some  way  represents  a unique  level 
of  social  development. 

Some  of  the  writers  on  aborigines  claim  as 
features  of  the  aboriginal  social  structure  of  the 
Southeast  such  traits  as  powerful  chieftainships, 
social  stratification  as  exemplified  by  here- 
ditary chieftainships,  and  “a  more  advanced 
type  of  political  organization”  and,  by  re- 
porting such  occurrences,  appear  to  validate 
for  the  Southeast  a level  of  social  organization 
not  known  elsewhere  in  Australia.  To  be 
specific,  powerful  “chiefs”  or  “kings”  were 
noted  by  several. early  chroniclers;  for  instance, 
Howitt  (1904,  p.  337)  cites  William  Thomas,  a 
Guardian  of  Aborigines  in  the  Colony  of 
Victoria  in  the  1850’s  (W.  Thomas,  1878, 
p.  1 18),  as  the  author  of  such  statements. 
Howitt,  himself,  alleged  an  emergent  variety 
of  social  stratification  when  he  suggested  that 
the  chieftainships  of  southeastern  Australia 
tended  to  be  hereditary.  In  1940,  Norman  B. 
Tindale  (p.  150)  specified  the  Kamilaroi  and 
Wiradjuri  tribes  of  southeastern  Australia  as 
having  “the  beginnings  of  a more  advanced 
type  of  political  organization”;  while,  in  1953, 
Tindale’s  assertion  was  accepted  by  Joseph  B. 
Birdsell,  who  attributed  this  advance  to 
“matrilineal  descent”  (pp.  175,  193). 

Southeastern  Australia  includes  a relatively 
well-watered  coastal  area.  Therefore,  a pro- 
position made  by  Elman  Service  becomes 
significant  when  the  social  and  political  level 
of  this  region  is  discussed.  Service  writes: 

[An]  interesting  characteristic  of  Australia  is 
that  a regular  progression  from  the  rich,  rainy, 
coastal  areas  with  their  large  and  relatively 
sedentary  local  groups  to  the  desert  interior  with 
its  widely  scattered,  small,  wandering  population 
is  equally  a progression  from  least  formality  and 
complication  in  the  former  to  greatest  in  the  latter 
area  (1962,  p.  74). 

This  assertion  of  less  formality  and  compli- 
cation for  rich,  rainy,  coastal  areas  is  in 
apparent  contradiction  to  any  claim  of  a more 
advanced  social  level  for  coastal  southeastern 
Australia.  However,  both  are  claims  of  a 
special  social  and/or  political  level  for  this  area. 
In  contrast  to  such  suggestions  of  a unique 


variety  of  social  organization  for  all  or  a part 
of  the  southeast,  in  1950,  Birdsell  (p.  279) 
stated  that  “the  low  level  of  social  organization 
attained  in  Australia  was  constant  and  no- 
where permitted  the  successful  governing  of 
large  groups  of  people.” 

Clearly,  there  is  need  for  a review  of  the  data 
on  social  and/or  political  level  in  southeastern 
Australia.  The  question  which  the  present 
paper  will  try  to  answer  is : Are  the  social  and 
political  patterns  known  for  any  of  the 
aboriginal  tribes  of  southeastern  Australia 
sufficiently  distinct  to  warrant  a placement  of 
these  hunters  at  a different  social  level  than 
other  Australian  aboriginals? 

In  answering  this  question  it  is  relevant  to 
consider  (1)  the  data  on  powerful  chieftain- 
ships, (2)  the  material  concerning  social 
stratification  and  hereditary  chieftainships, 
(3)  problems  relating  to  the  complexity  of 
social  organization  in  southeastern  Australia, 
and  (4)  the  evidence  for  a more  advanced 
political  organization  among  the  Kamilaroi 
and  Wiradjuri  tribes. 

Limitations 

Before  turning  to  the  major  topics,  two  serious 
limitations  of  the  present  paper  should  be  made 
explicit. 

1.  I have  not  been  in  a position  to  carry  out 
actual  on-the-spot  ethnographic  investigation 
of  problems  prior  to  preparation  of  this  paper. 
In  fact,  probably  no  investigator  working  in 
the  last  fifty  years  could  have  collected  much 
meaningful  data  in  southeastern  Australia  on 
the  subjects  under  consideration,  for  our 
interest  is  in  the  pre-European  patterns  as  they 
existed  in  the  Australian  state  of  Victoria 
primarily,  prior  to  1835.  Any  field  worker 
undertaking  the  present  study  in  1966  would 
suffer  from  the  same  lack  of  firsthand  ex- 
perience with  the  pre-European  societies  being 
considered,  for  as  early  as  1880  Howitt 
(p.  224)  stated  that  the  information  he  could 
collect  on  Kurnai  local  groups  was  “im- 
perfect,” but  was  “all  that  . . . [could  then  be] 
rescued  from  oblivion,  and  must  suffice.” 

2.  The  number  of  primary  sources  available 
to  me  is  to  a degree  inadequate  for  the  study 
at  hand;  some  of  the  rarer  published  sources 


140  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

have  not  been  accessible.  Only  by  months  of 
touring  local  libraries,  archives,  and  newspaper 
offices  can  one  collect  the  data  for  detailed 
ethnohistorical  analysis  such  as  should  properly 
be  the  foundation  of  the  present  paper.  But 
even  with  the  references  available,  tentative 
conclusions  about  the  social  level  of  the  South- 
east can  be  reached. 


Powerful  Chieftainships 

Some  early  writers  on  southeastern  Australia 
stressed  the  power  of  native  leaders  by  using 
labels  such  as  “king”  (Howitt,  1904,  p.  307, 
citing  William  Thomas).  For  instance,  Thomas 
Honery  writing  about  the  Wailwun  tribes  of 
western  New  South  Wales  in  1878.  (p.  250) 
refers  to  their  headmen  as  “kings”;  while 
R.  H.  Mathews  (1896c,  p.  296),  reporting 
events  of  the  same  tribe  about  fifteen  years 
later,  notes  that  the  local  whites  use  the  “king” 
designation  for  a native  local  leader.  Mathews 
(1894,  pp.  110-11)  also  mentions  the  use  of 
the  “king”  label  by  a Kamilaroi  for  a head- 
man during  a ceremony  in  1894;  while  a 
northwestern  New  South  Wales  half-caste  in- 
formant of  Beckett  (1958,  p.  104)  still  retained 
the  usage  in  the  1950’s. 

Howitt  discusses  the  use  of  the  terms  “king” 
and  “chief”  by  early  writers  and  states: 

I have  chosen  the  term  Headman  as  being  less 
likely  to  be  misunderstood  than  that  of  Chief, 
which  has  associations  not  applicable  to  the 
Australian  savage.  But  if  we  must  use  the  word 
Chief  to  imply  a person  having  power  to  direct 
the  people  of  his  class  or  tribe,  and  that  his  direc- 
tions or  orders  are  obeyed  by  them  I say  . . . 
[there]  are  Chiefs.  Although  when  compared 
with  those  of  well-known  tribes  in  other  parts  of 
the  world,  their  power  is  limited,  yet  it  is  an 
actual  power  command,  coupled  with  a certain 
measure  of  ability  to  compel  obedience  (1904, 
p.  320). 

Similarly,  Le  Souef  states,  concerning  the 
tribes  of  Victoria : 

A good  deal  has  been  written  and  said  about 
chieftainship,  but  nothing  of  the  kind  exists; 
there  are  certainly  a few  men — generally  the 


boldest  and  strongest  and  very  often  the  most 
mischievous — who  acquire  some  ascendency  in 
their  tribe,  but  they  have  not  recognized  authority 
as  the  American  Indian  chiefs  have  ( 1 878,  p.  295) . 

It  would  appear  that  any  assertions  of  powerful 
chieftainship  for  Victoria  are  overstatements  of 
the  type  of  leadership  present;  leadership  was 
essentially  of  the  same  type  in  southeastern 
Australia  as  elsewhere  on  the  continent. 

Social  Stratification 

The  assertion  by  Howitt  (1904,  p.  319)  that  in 
some  tribes  the  local  group  leadership  passed 
from  father  to  son  might  be  taken  as  a sugges- 
tion of  a kind  of  minimal  occurrence  of  social 
stratification.  Howitt,  indeed,  states : 

Most  of  the  Headmen  were  related  to  each 
other  by  marriage,  and  thus  in  a family  . . . where 
there  was  a tendency  for  authority  to  become 
hereditary,  there  was  a germ  of  a practice  which, 
under  favourable  circumstances,  might  have 
established  a privileged  family,  such  as  some  of 
my  correspondents  have  spoken  of  (1904,  pp. 
310-n). 

However,  I would  suggest  two  possible 
circumstances  under  which  transmission  of 
local  group  leadership  from  father  to  son 
should  not  be  taken  as  the  emergence  of  social 
stratification  as  an  occurrence  in  the  aboriginal 
Southeast.  The  first  of  these  explanations  would 
acknowledge  the  existence  of  such  transmission, 
but  would  question  its  presence  in  the  pre- 
European  era.  Beckett  (1958,  p.  104)  notes 
that  in  some  parts  of  Australia  local  cattle 
and/or  sheep  station  owners  formerly  ap- 
pointed a special  local  tribal  elder  as  “king.” 
It  would  seem  possible  that  the  station-owning 
family  would  also  impose  English  primogeni- 
ture as  it  applies  to  titles  when  the  office  of 
“king”  was  again  vacant;  indeed,  the  abori- 
ginal group  may  have  borrowed  the  British 
pattern  of  inheritance  for  kingships  in  imita- 
tion of  English  royal  pattern  without  any 
overt  statement  by  the  station  owners  as  to  how 
the  kingship  should  pass  on  to  the  next 
generation.  As  Howitt’s  data  were  collected  at 
least  thirty  years  after  the  initial  settling  of  the 


Pilling  Southeastern  Australia:  Level  of  Social  Organization  141 


Southeast  by  Europeans,  it  seems  that  such  a 
European  pattern  may  have,  by  then,  become 
accepted  pattern  in  some  tribal  groups,  with- 
out it  necessarily  reflecting  pre-European 
patterns. 

A second  possible  explanation  rests  in  part 
upon  the  general  presence  in  Australia  of 
“gerontocracy/polygyny,”  as  discussed  by 
F.  G.  G.  Rose  (1960b)  for  Arnhem  Land  and 
other  Australian  groups.  Le  Souef  reports 
gerontocracy/polygyny,  apparently  for  all 
Victorian  Aboriginal  groups,  when  he  writes: 

Polygamy  is  universal;  but  it  is  generally  the 
old  men  of  the  tribe  who  have  the  greatest  num- 
ber of  wives.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  they 
exchange  their  young  daughters  for  young  wives 
for  themselves  (1878,  p.  291). 

Rose  (1960b,  p.  1 19)  notes  the  same  pattern 
for  the  Kurnai. 

A survey  of  the  pre-European  data  for  Tiwi 
(Pilling,  1961,  Table  1)  showed  that  five  “big 
men”  (or  headmen)  allegedly  sired  76  child- 
ren; while  14  “ordinary  married  men” 
allegedly  sired  42  children,  meaning,  in  this 
instance,  that  about  two-thirds  of  the  children 
born  were  sired  by  headmen.  That  is,  a man 
with  several  wives  and  many  children  was 
more  likely  to  become  a leader,  a leader  had 
the  prestige  which  brought  him  more  wives, 
and  more  wives  produced  more  children.  On 
an  average,  such  a headman,  at  his  death,  had 
more  adult  sons;  there  would  be  more  votes 
cast  by  these  sons  than  by  all  other  men  in 
the  group;  and  this  feature  alone  would  favor 
one  of  these  sons,  usually  the  eldest,  being 
chosen  as  the  next  leader.  That  is,  in  south- 
eastern Australia,  as  well  as  elsewhere  on  the 
continent,  a son  may  inherit  his  father’s 
headmanship,  without  such  an  occurrence 
being  a suggestion  of  social  stratification,  when 
the  majority  of  men  are  the  sons  of  headmen, 
as  was  probably  often  the  case  in  aboriginal 
local  groups. 

Complexity  of  Social  Organization 

Elman  Service’s  statement  (1962,  p.  74)  that 
there  is  “a  regular  progression  from  the  rich, 
rainy,  coastal  areas  with  their  large  and 


relatively  sedentary  local  groups  to  the  desert 
interior  with  its  widely  scattered,  small, 
wandering  population  is  equally  a progression 
from  least  formality  and  complication  in  the 
former  to  greatest  in  the  latter  area”  needs  de- 
tailed evaluation.  Yet  such  a task  is  hampered 
by  an  uncertainty  as  to  what  is  meant  by 
“formality”  and  “complication”  in  his  state- 
ment. The  way  in  which  one  is  to  measure  the 
complexity  of  social  organization  in  hunting 
and  collecting  groups  needs  explicit  statement. 
Does  Service  mean  that  there  is  a larger 
number  of  status  terms,  as  he  implies  at  one 
point  (1962,  p.  73)?  Does  he  mean  there  are 
more  non-kinship  status  terms? 

What  Service  means  by  “formality”  and 
“complication”  becomes  obvious  by  reference 
to  his  page  74,  where  he  states  that  his  criterion 
is  “more  kinds  of  sodalities,”  which  he  seems 
to  define  as  non-residential  special-purpose  groups 
(1962,  p.  21). 

To  test  Service’s  generalization,  let  us  com- 
pare the  number  of  “kinds  of”  “non-residential 
special-purpose  groups”  (1962,  pp.  74,  21)  for 
several  coastal  areas  with  those  for  the  desert 
tribes.  Service  lists  for  desert  tribes  three  kinds 
of  non-residential  special-purpose  groups : 

(1)  initiation-centered  sodalities,-  (2)  totemic 
“clans,”  and  (3)  blood-brotherhoods  (Service, 
1962,  p.  74).  Reference  to  the  Kurnai  for 
southeastern  Australia  shows  at  least  two,  and 
probably  three,  varieties:  (1)  initiation-cen- 
tered sodalities  (Howitt,  1904,  p.  616-38), 

(2)  totemic  sex  moieties  (Howitt,  1904,  pp. 
148-50),  and  (3)  totemic  “clans”  (Howitt, 
1904,  p.  135).  The  Gournditchmara  tribe  of 
western  Victoria  also  has  two,  and  possibly 
three,  types  of  sodalities:  (1)  totemic  matri- 
moieties,  (2)  totemic  matriclans  (Howitt, 
1904,  pp.  124-25),  and  (3)  initiation-centered 
sodalities  (Howitt,  1904,  p.  690).  Clearly,  one 
cannot  say  that  the  number  of  “kinds  of  . . . 
non-residential  special-purpose  groups”  is 
dramatically  higher  for  the  arid  parts  of 
Australia  than  for  the  two  southeast  Australian 
groups  noted. 

However,  the  invalidity  of  Service’s  generali- 
zation becomes  even  more  conspicuous  when 
one  lists  the  number  of  kinds  of  sodalities  for 
the  Tiwi,  a north  coastal  group:  (1)  “one- 
grandfather”  or  aminiyati  groups,  (2)  patri- 
lineal dance  groups,  (3)  totemic  matriclans, 


142  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

(4)  totemic  supermatriclans,  (5)  totemic  matri- 
phratries,  (6)  unnamed  matrimoieties,  (7) 
named  subdivisions  of  matriclans,  dependent 
upon  recognized  alternating  genealogical  gen- 
erations, and  (8)  initiation-centered  sodalities 
(Pilling,  1958,  pp.  43-73)- 

Let  the  preceding  suffice  to  illustrate  that 
there  is  no  justification  for  claiming  that 
Australian  desert  groups  have  a significantly 
more  complex  social  structure  than  every 
Australian  coastal  group,  including  those  of 
the  Southeast.  In  fact,  I would  stress  that  we 
are  very  far  from  knowing  how  to  measure 
complexity  of  social  organization  among 
Australian,  as  well  as  other,  hunting  groups. 

Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri 

The  assertions  of  Tindale  (1940,  p.  150)  and 
Birdsell  (1953,  pp.  175,  193)  that  the  Kami- 
laroi and  Wiradjuri  tribes  have  “a  more 
advanced  type  of  political  organization”  are 
worthy  of  evaluation.  It  should  be  noted 
initially  that  these  recent  assertions  of  an  ad- 
vanced type  of  political  organization  relate  not 
to  coastal  tribes  in  southeastern  Australia,  but 
to  the  tribes  of  the  headwaters  of  the  great 
Murray-Darling  river  system.  Tindale  states 
that  a general  positive  correlation  between 
amount  of  rainfall  and  density  of  population 
does  not  seem  to  hold 

among  the  Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri,  where 
especially  widespread  communities  seem  to  have 
developed  in  relatively  fertile  country  (1940, 
P ,5°)- 

Birdsell  writes: 

Consolidation  among  tribal  groups  seems  to 
have  occurred  in  the  central  interior  of  New  South 
Wales,  among  such  tribes  as  the  Kamilaroi  and 
Wiradjuri.  This  trend  appears  to  reflect  the 
development  of  a more  advanced  type  of  political 
organization  based  upon  matrilineal  descent 
(’953;  P-  *75)- 

The  statement  of  Tindale  above  does  not 
indicate  why  he  believes  the  Kamilaroi  and 
Wiradjuri  may  be  said  to  have  “the  beginnings 
of  a more  advanced  type  of  political  organiza- 


tion.” We  must,  therefore,  attempt  to  test  the 
validity  of  his  claim  without  any  hint  as  to  the 
basis  he  used  to  determine  the  political  level  of 
these  tribes.  The  relative  power  of  the  head- 
men, the  existence  of  hereditary  headmanships, 
and  the  number  of  kinds  of  sodalities  (as  de- 
fined by  Service)  will  be  our  measures. 

Powerful  Headmen 

In  regard  to  the  power  of  headmen,  it  is  note- 
worthy that  the  term  “king”  was  used  by  a 
native  in  1 894  for  an  image  of  a Kamilaroi 
headman,  but  in  a context  which  seemed  to  dis- 
claim that  such  a “king”  was  then  viewed  as 
awesome  by  young  aboriginal  males  (Mathews, 
1894,  pp.  110-11).  Mathews’  (1897b,  p.  151) 
description  of  a northern  Kamilaroi  Bora,  or 
initiation,  ceremony  in  the  1890’s  states  that  at 
one  point  during  the  ceremony  “one  or  more 
of  the  head  men  of  each  tribe  stand  out  in 
their  turn.”  Mathews  (1894,  p.  106)  also  re- 
ports the  Kunopia  local  group  of  the  northern 
Kamilaroi  as  having  two  leaders  in  1894,  while 
the  Gundabloui  group  of  the  same  tribe  had 
but  one  headman.  Elsewhere,  Howitt  writes  of 
the  northern  Kamilaroi : 

Mr.  Cyril  E.  Doyle,  writing  to  me  of  the 
Kamilaroi  blacks  of  the  Gwydir  River,  says  that 
the  old  men  of  the  tribe  formed  a council  which 
managed  all  matters  of  importance.  It  was  they 
who  sent  messengers  to  distant  places  (1889b, 
p.  322). 

Concerning  the  southern  Kamilaroi,  Howitt 
states: 

As  to  the  southern  tribes  of  the  Kamilaroi, 
situated  to  the  northward  of  Maitland,  I have 
evidence  dating  back  to  about  1 830.  There  might 
be  two  or  three  Headmen  in  each  division  of  the 
tribe.  Their  position  was  one  of  influence  and 
authority,  and  depended  on  the  valour  of  the 
individual  (Howitt,  1904,  p.  302). 

In  regard  to  the  statements  above,  it  should  be 
noted  that  both  Mathews  and  Doyle  seem  to 
use  the  term  “tribe”  for  local  group;  while 
Howitt  employs  “division  of  the  tribe”  to 
designate  such  a unit.  If  these  interpretations 
of  terms  are  correct,  close  analysis  reveals  new 


•43 


Pilling  Southeastern  Australia:  Level  of  Social  Organization 


information.  The  early  reports  on  the  Kami- 
laroi,  that  of  Doyle  and  that  for  the  area  north 
of  Maitland,  do  not  mention  supreme  local 
group  leaders,  but  only  a kind  of  council  of 
several  elders;  the  occasional  occurrence  of  a 
single  local  headman  is  not  mentioned  until  the 
1890’s,  more  than  fifty  years  after  the  area  was 
first  settled  by  Europeans. 

Apparently  somewhat  in  contrast  to  the 
above  opinion,  Howitt  writes: 

The  oldest  Headman  would  be  the  chief  or 
principal  man  in  the  council  of  elders.  He  could 
carry  a measure  by  his  own  voice,  as  the  Kamilaroi 
have  great  respect  for  age.  The  Headman  had  a 
great  amount  of  authority,  and  all  the  disputes 
among  the  members  of  his  division  of  the  tribe 
would  be  settled  by  him  (1904,  pp.  302-303). 

The  context  of  this  statement  becomes  clearer 
when  one  refers  to  other  of  Howitt’s  words: 

The  greatest  Bora  of  all  the  Kamilaroi  tribes 
was  always  held  at  Terryhaihai.  All  the  Headmen 
were  there,  and  the  oldest  was  the  principal,  or 
president  of  them,  and  he  could  carry  some 
decisions  by  his  own  voice  (1904,  p.  594). 

Howitt’s  reference  to  the  power  of  the  oldest 
or  principal  headman  may  easily  be  no  more 
than  a statement  in  relation  to  his  functioning 
at  the  time  of  Bora  ceremonies,  and  probably 
relates  to  the  era  after  the  provision  of  govern- 
ment rations  during  Boras  allowed  greater 
attendance  at  Bora  ceremonies. 

The  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of 
the  oldest  headman  at  a Bora  suggests  that  in 
this  context  a single  male  became  the 
Kamilaroi  leader.  However,  in  contrast  to 
Howitt’s  statement  suggesting  that  all  Kami- 
laroi assembled  for  Boras,  Mathews’  accounts 
(1894,  1895,  1896c,  1897b)  of  Boras  in  the 
1890’s  make  it  clear  that  such  ceremonies  did 
not  bring  together  males  from  all  Kamilaroi  local 
groups,  so  that  such  a ceremonial  leader  did  not 
become  even  temporarily  the  Kamilaroi  leader. 

In  summary,  it  appears  that  Kamilaroi 
local  groups  may  never  have  been  led  by  a 
single  senior  male  in  the  pre-European  era, 
but  were  occasionally  considered  to  be  so  con- 
trolled in  the  era  after  the  Europeans  ap- 
pointed “kings.”  At  Kamilaroi  Bora  cere- 


monies, the  oldest  headman  present  assumed 
the  leadership  of  the  whole  assembled  group, 
at  least  by  the  late  nineteenth  century.  Such  a 
pattern  of  leadership  is  not  especially  complex 
or  elaborate  for  aboriginal  Australia,  nor  does 
it  suggest  an  especially  powerful  occurrence  of 
leadership  for  the  Kamilaroi.  For  instance, 
Howitt  (1904,  pp.  297-98)  notes  that  among 
the  Dieri  of  the  arid  interior  in  the  1880’s  that 
“some  one  [of  the  headmen]  is  superior  to  the 
others”  of  the  tribe,  and  by  then  had  become 
essentially  the  tribal  leader;  while  Howitt 
(1904,  pp.  314,  526)  suggests  for  the  Yuin  of 
the  southern  coast  of  New  South  Wales  that 
each  local  group  had  only  one  leader,  one  of 
whom  assumed  the  headship  of  the  Yuin  tribal 
Kuringal  ceremony. 

What  little  is  known  of  local  group  leader- 
ship for  the  Wiradjuri  suggests  that  this  tribal 
group  had  no  more  powerful  local  leaders  than 
the  Kamilaroi.  Howitt  says: 

In  the  southern  Wiradjuri  a Headman  is  called 
Bidjabidja,  and,  as  I have  heard  him  described, 
is  one  who  “gives  orders  to  people,”  there  being 
a Headman  of  this  sort  in  each  local  division.  . . . 
If,  for  instance,  he  were  the  oldest  Yibai  [one  of 
the  four  intertribal  sections — A.R.P.]  ...  he 
would  be  the  head  of  the  Yibai  sub-class;  but, 
assuming  that  he  also  became  the  Headman  of 
the  local  group,  then  all  the  people  of  that 
division,  not  only  of  this  “Budjan”  (sub-class), 
would  obey  him.  Each  totem  also  had  its  Head- 
man. I have  heard  the  Bidja-bidja  spoken  of  by  a 
term  equivalent  to  “master,”  this  being  the 
analogue  of  the  Biamban  of  the  Y uin  ( 1 904,  p.  303 ) . 

Another  passage  by  Howitt  causes  one  to 
realize  that  there  were  usually  several  head- 
men in  a Wiradjuri  local  group: 

In  each  locality  the  oldest  man  of  any  totem 
[named  division  of  the  four  intertribal  sections — 
A.R.P.]  is  the  head  of  the  totem  there,  and  the 
oldest  man  of  any  totem  is  the  head  of  that  as  a 
whole.  Important  messages,  such  as  those  relating 
to  the  initiation  ceremony  . . . are  sent  by  a 
headman.  The  messenger  must  be  of  the  same 
totem  as  the  sender,  and  the  messenger  is  sent  to 
the  oldest  man  of  the  same  totem  in  the  locality 
to  which  the  message  is  sent.  This  oldest  man  is 
the  head  of  the  totem  there  (1889b,  p.  321). 


144  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

Mathews  (1897c!,  p.  1 1 8)  in  his  discussion  of 
the  Burbung  initiation  ceremonies  of  the 
Wiradjuri  indicates  that  the  local  headman  of 
the  host  locality  acts  as  the  “initiator,”  that  is 
the  person  who  initiates  arrangements  for  the 
Burbung  ceremony.  Beyond  this  minor  office, 
no  single  individual  seems  to  have  held  a 
special  role  during  Wiradjuri  initiations. 

In  general,  we  may  say  that  the  role  of  the 
headman  among  neither  the  Kamilaroi  or  the 
Wiradjuri  seems  outside  of  the  range  of 
political  power  found  elsewhere  in  southeastern 
Australia  and  seems  somewhat  less  powerful 
than  that  held  by  the  Dieri  tribal  headman. 

Hereditary  Chieftains 

The  existence  of  families  which  have  produced 
many  chiefs  or  a strong  tendency  for  hereditary 
chieftainships  might  have  caused  Tindale  and 
Birdsell  to  assert  the  existence  of  a more 
advanced  political  organization  for  the  Kami- 
laroi and  Wiradjuri.  However,  the  evidence 
does  not  support  an  unusual  development  of 
hereditary  leadership  for  either  group.  Howitt 
says  of  the  Kamilaroi  office  of  headman  : 

It  was  not  hereditary,  but  a man  who  distin- 
guished himself  as  a warrior  or  orator  would 
become  a leader  by  mere  force  of  character,  and 
his  son,  if  valiant,  would  be  very  highly  thought 
of  (1904,  p.  302). 

Of  the  Wiradjuri,  Howitt  writes: 

The  office  of  Headman  was  in  a sense  heredi- 
tary, for  a son  would  inherit  the  position  of  his 
father,  if  he  possessed  any  oratorical  or  other 
eminent  ability.  But  if  not,  then  the  son  of  the 
brother  of  the  deceased  Headman  would  probably 
hold  the  position,  and  failing  him  some  qualified 
relative  of  the  same  sub-class.  But  this  was  with 
the  consent  of  the  community,  for  the  office  went 
in  fact  by  election  in  each  division  (1904,  p. 
303)- 

Quite  obviously,  neither  the  Kamilaroi  or 
Wiradjuri  had  sufficiently  hereditary  chief- 
tainships to  mark  them  as  distinct  from  oth£r 
Australian  groups. 


Number  of  Kinds  of  Sodalities 

Service’s  suggestion  that  social  complexity 
should  be  judged  in  terms  of  the  number  of 
kinds  of  non-residential  special-purpose  groups 
causes  one  to  turn  to  this  topic  in  order  to 
measure  the  sociopolitical  level  of  the  Kami- 
laroi and  the  Wiradjuri.  This  area  is  well  docu- 
mented for  the  two  tribal  groups.  The 
Kamilaroi  have  five  varieties:  (1)  matri- 

moieties;  (2)  four  sections,  with  determination 
of  membership  based  on  the  maternal  section 
(Radcliffe-Brown,  1931,  p.  230;  Mathews, 
1897c,  p.  160;  1904,  p.214);  (3)  totemic 
matriclans  (Mathews,  1897c,  p.  159;  Radcliffe- 
Brown,  1931,  p.230);  (4)  a second  matri- 
moiety  system,  which  was  probably  reflected 
in  the  residential  pattern,  and  consisted  of  the 
“blood”  and  “shade”  divisions  (Mathews, 
1904,  p.  209;  Radcliffe-Brown,  1931,  p.  232); 
and  (5)  Bora-centered  sodalities  (Mathews, 
1894,  1895,  1896c,  1897b).  The  Wiradjuri  of 
the  upper  portion  of  the  Murrumbidgee  River 
(Mathews,  1897c,  p.  175),  likewise,  had  four, 
or  possibly  five,  kinds  of  sodalities:  (1)  matri- 
moieties;  (2)  four  sections,  with  determination 
as  among  the  Kamilaroi  (Mathews,  1896a; 
1897a;  1897c,  pp.  173-74;  Radcliffe-Brown, 
1931,  p.  230),  (3)  named,  totemic  subdivisions 
of  these  sections  (Mathews,  1897c,  pp.  173- 
74),  (4)  Burbung-centered  sodalities  (Howitt, 
1884,  pp.  438,  443,  445,  447,  452,  455,  456, 
458;  Mathews,  1896b,  pp.  38,  39;  i8g6d; 
1897c;  18976),  and  possibly  (5)  “blood”  and 
“shade”  matrimoieties  (Radcliffe-Brown, 
1931,  p.  232).  The  remainder  of  the  Wiradjuri 
tribal  area  is  alleged  to  have  the  Kamilaroi 
pattern  of  organization  (Mathews,  1897c, 
P-  1 75)- 

If  one  rates  societies  in  terms  of  the  number 
of  kinds  of  non-residential  special-purpose 
groups,  the  interior  Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri 
tribes  show  an  incidence  of  a couple  of  more 
types  of  units  than  either  the  desert  Aranda  or 
the  coastal  Kurnai;  they  have  fewer  types  of 
sodalities  than  the  north  coastal  Tiwi.  The 
Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri  are  not  significantly 
outside  of  the  range  of  other  Australian  groups, 
if  one  measures  political  advancement  in  terms 
of  the  number  of  kinds  of  sodalities. 


Pilling  Southeastern  Australia:  Level  of  Social  Organization  145 


Matrilineal  Descent 

Birdsell  asserts  as  mentioned  before  that  the 
alleged  Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri  political  ad- 
vance is  “based  upon  matrilineal  descent” 
( 1 953?  P-  !75)-  His  phrasing  suggests  two  pos- 
sible interpretations:  (1)  the  occurrence  of 
matrilineal  descent  among  these  tribes  caused 
Birdsell  to  classify  them  as  more  advanced,  or 
(2)  the  allegedly  “more  advanced  type  of 
political  organization”  was  the  product  of 
some  aspect  of  the  matriliny  of  the  social 
patterns  of  these  tribes.  Few  modern  anthro- 
pologists would  accept  as  meaningful  the 
classification  of  a tribe  as  more  advanced 
simply  because  it  had  matrilineal  descent,  so 
we  may  safely  exclude  the  first  possibility,  and 
limit  our  discussion  to  the  second. 

Can  the  existence  of  matrilineal  descent  have 
been  the  sole  cause  of  whatever  feature  of 
Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri  society  is  taken  by 
Tindale  and  Birdsell  as  indication  of  “the 
beginnings  of  a more  advanced  political 
system”  among  these  two  tribes?  A negative 
response  would  seem  to  be  the  only  one  which 
would  be  given  by  a person  familiar  with  the 
social  patterns  of  the  tribes  of  eastern  Australia. 
At  least  half  of  the  present  states  of  South 
Australia,  New  South  Wales,  and  Queensland 
were  occupied  by  aboriginal  groups  having 
matrilineal  descent  (Howitt,  1889a,  opp.  p.  31 ; 
1904,  opp.  p.  90;  Radcliffe-Brown,  1931,  opp. 
p.  42).  Within  this  area,  many  of  the  tribes 
adjacent  to  the  Kamilaroi  and  most  of  the 
tribes  of  Queensland  have  the  “Kamilaroi 
Type”  of  matrilineal  descent  (Howitt,  1889a, 
opp.  p.  31).  Yet  neither  Tindale  nor  Birdsell 
suggest  that  the  other  tribes  in  this  area  have  a 
social  structure  with  an  advanced  political 
organization.  Clearly  the  Kamilaroi  type 
matrilineal  social  organization  was  not  viewed 
by  Tindale  and  Birdsell  as  sufficient  grounds 
for  classifying  all  these  tribes  as  more  advanced. 


Conclusion 

Only  one  conclusion  seems  possible  about  any 
assertion  that  singles  out  the  Kamilaroi  and 
Wiradjuri  as  especially  advanced  compared 
to  other  Australian  tribes,  especially  the 
Queensland  tribes  to  their  north.  A review  of 
the  major  ethnographic  accounts  of  these  two 
tribes  does  not  suggest  that  “the  development 
of  a more  advanced  type  of  political  organiza- 
tion” was  sufficiently  under  way  in  these 
groups  to  have  been  noted  by  the  ethno- 
graphers and  other  chroniclers  who  considered 
these  tribes  during  the  last  century  when  many 
informants  were  alive  whose  parents,  if  not 
themselves,  had  known  the  pre-European 
social  patterns.  Whatever  political  development 
has  occurred  to  cause  these  tribes  to  be  classi- 
fied as  “more  advanced”  must,  indeed,  be  very 
recent. 


Summary 

A review  of  sources  on  southeastern  Australia, 
an  area  where  the  environment  was  clearly 
richer  than  in  many  other  parts  of  Australia, 
strongly  suggests  that  the  aboriginal  tribes  of 
this  area  did  not  have  any  especially  advanced, 
or  simple,  type  of  social  organization.  Schemes 
proposing  that,  throughout,  this  area  had 
either  a significantly  elaborate  or  especially 
simple  social  and/or  political  structure  seem 
not  to  be  based  upon  a detailed  and  careful 
analyses  of  the  best  available  sources. 

The  most  nearly  accurate  previously-pub- 
lished statement  on  the  actual  social  level  of 
southeast  Australia  is  to  be  found  in  a 1950 
paper  by  Joseph  B.  Birdsell  (p.  279) ; “The 
low  level  of  social  organization  attained  in 
Australia  was  constant.” 


Discussions,  Part  III 


1 7a.  On  Ethnographic  Reconstruction 

Speakers : Birdsell,  Gardner,  Hiatt,  R.  Lee,  Meggitt, 
Rose,  Williams,  Woodburn 

Lee:  A central  theme  in  the  papers  we  have 
been  hearing  today  concerns  the  reconstruction 
of  ethnographic- situations  that  are  no  longer 
intact.  We  can  take  off  from  Hiatt’s  paper 
(1962  and  Chapter  10,  this  volume)  in  which 
he  points  out  that  Radcliffe-Brown  among  the 
Kariera  was  working  with  a detribalized 
situation.  This  field  situation  undoubtedly 
contributed  to  Radcliffe-Brown’s  excessive 
emphasis  on  formal  rules.  The  fact  is  that  for- 
mal rules  are  a residuum  in  a memory  culture, 
where  the  local  organization  has  broken  down. 
Naturally,  the  kind  of  material  they  feed  the 
anthropologist  will  be  their  ideology,  not  the 
description  of  day-to-day  movements.  How- 
ever, we  have  heard  of  a number  of  cases  at 
this  conference  in  which  ethnographers  have 
observed  the  local  organization  still  function- 
ing, and  these  observations — as  distinguished 
from  interviewing  informants  in  a memory 
situation — show  that  groups  in  Australia, 
Africa,  North  America  and  India,  are  flexible 
and  composite,  and  one  sees  people  exercising 
options  according  to  a number  of  variables — 
not  only  kinship  connection,  but  also  personal 
associations,  and  ecology.  This  is  quite  a differ- 
ent picture  from  the  simple  model  of  the  patri- 


local,  territorial,  exogamous,  band  that  has 
come  to  us  via  Service  (1962),  out  of  Radcliffe- 
Brown  (1931).  What  we  are  actually  observ- 
ing is  the  work  group,  and  it  is  important  for 
us  to  distinguish,  as  Leach  suggests,  between 
the  conscious  models  of  ideal  group  structure 
and  statistical  models  derived  from  the  real 
choices  of  real  people.  No  one  would  deny  that 
the  conscious  model  is  also  a part  of  reality;  it 
is.  But  it  is  equally  dangerous  to  assume,  as 
Radcliffe-Brown  did.^  that  the  conscious  model 
alone  was  an  accurate  or  even  approximate 
reflection  of  group  structure. 

Birdsell  : I think  Dr.  Hiatt  has  raised  a very 
important  point,  which  I would  like  to  discuss 
both  indirectly  and  directly.  The  question  is 
not  so  much  his  quarrel  with  Radcliffe-Brown 
— which  Stanner  answered  last  year  (Stanner, 
1965)  although  he  left  it  hanging  on  this  note: 
“All  the  large  communities  that  have  been 
quoted  in  the  1962  paper  by  Dr.  Hiatt,  are 
indeed,  modern  ones  and  post-acculturational 
and,  in  fact,  tied — to  one  degree  or  another — 
to  European  economy.” 

Now,  before  approaching  that,  let  me  say 
that  my  own  belief  is  that  precontact  Austra- 
lians can  have  lived  in  as  large  a group  as  that 
for  which  we  can  define  a subsistence  base. 
Reconstruction  is  a tricky  business,  and  I 
would  like  to  present  and  discuss  three  recent 
examples  of  this  approach. 

1.  One  is  the  very  elegant  reconstruction  of 


146 


Ainu  social  organization  and  local  grouping 
by  Dr.  Watanabe  (1964  and  Chapter  7,  this 
volume).  It  is  a very  careful  reconstruction 
going  back  almost  a century  in  time.  In  it  he 
has  used  ecological  data  and  genealogies  to 
provide  the  demographic  variables. 

2.  Ted  Strehlow  in  a recent  publication 
(•965))  rather  strikingly  reinvents  Radcliffe- 
Brown’s  geometrical  pattern  of  patrilineal  local 
groups.  I should  note  that  Strehlow  was  born 
in  Aranda  territory,  grew  up  speaking  as 
much  Aranda  as  he  did  English  and  German, 
and  he  has  devoted  his  life  to  the  study  of  the 
Western  Aranda.  In  short,  I think  his  data  are 
as  impeccable  as  data  collected  this  late  could 
be.  He  does  find  rigorous  territoriality,  defined 
in  terms  of  people  and  totem  associations  and 
having  definite  boundaries. 

3.  Recently  Norman  Tindale  (1962b)  pub- 
lished a reconstruction  of  the  Kaiadilt  people 
and  their  country.  This  is  a group  of  (origin- 
ally) 120  people  living  on  Bentinck  Island  in 
the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.  He  found  them  about 
four  years  after  they  were  removed  from  the 
island;  previously,  they  had  been  totally 
isolated  and,  therefore,  were  still  within  twelve 
years  of  precontact  structure.  Interestingly 
enough,  as  far  as  you  can  define  marine  den- 
sities by  terrestrial  areas  (which  is  not  a good 
measure),  these  are  as  densely  situated  a people 
as  any  in  Australia;  they  come  to  about  three 
persons  per  square  land  mile.  Among  them,  he 
could  reconstruct  eight  bands,  each  territorially 
resident  in  a fixed  area — even  to  the  detail  of 
discovering  one  disputed  interband  territory. 
Band  size,  ranging  from  something  like  8 to  35, 
is  interesting,  since  they  lived  by  generalized 
food  resources.  These,  then,  were  small  bands 
in  enormous  density.  Though,  perhaps,  the 
most  advantaged  of  tropical  island  peoples, 
they  show  the  same  rigorous  territorial  pattern 
projected  by  earlier  modelists. 

Now,  I think  no  one  will  quarrel  with  the 
Sydney  workers  in  terms  of  the  reconstruction 
of  social  organization;  they  have  done  it 
superbly.  But,  as  Stanner  also  points  out 
(rgGs),  there  are  almost  no  workers  in  Aus- 
tralia who  have  fitted  real  men  into  real 
country.  So  I suggest  that  what  we  need  is  the 
insertion  of  significant  ecological  analyses, 
based  upon  significant  demographic  data.  I 
would  say,  then,  that  one  cannot  go  to  a 


Discussions,  Part  III  147 

modern  mission  station,  government  station,  or 
mining  town  and — without  inserting  demo- 
graphy and  ecology — reconstruct  previously 
functioning  local  group  structure,  or,  for  that 
matter,  territoriality.  These  things  vanish  with 
contact. 

Hiatt:  I would  like  to  deal  with  several  of 
the  points  raised  by  Dr.  Birdsell.  It  is  at  least 
questionable  that  Stanner  (1965)  has 
“answered”  my  1962  paper;  it  was  more  an 
exegetical  attempt  to  show  that  Radcliffe- 
Brown  had  not  said  the  things  I attributed  to 
him.  In  one  part  of  his  paper,  he  does  say — as 
Birdsell  noted — that  the  modern  studies  have 
dealt  with  postcontact  communities.  This  is  a 
curious  assertion,  since,  as  far  as  I know,  all  the 
studies  of  local  organization  in  Australia  have 
involved  communities  that  have  been  seriously 
affected  by  European  contact.  Radcliffe- 
Brown  was  in  no  better  position  to  study 
territoriality  than  the  rest  of  us. 

I do  not  think  that  my  rebuttals  of  Radcliffe- 
Brown’s  ideas  add  up  to  a new  generalization. 
Given  the  ecological  diversity  in  Australia,  it  is 
unlikely  that  there  was  a single  type  of  local 
organization.  And  I suspect  that  it  is  too  late 
now  to  establish  the  main  varieties.  However, 
if  Tindale  has  shown  that  there  is  a horde  in 
the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  I am  quite  happy 
about  it.  I did  not  say  categorically  that  there 
was  not  one,  but  only  that  so  far  no  one  has 
ever  seen  one. 

Concerning  Strehlow’s  work — the  Hermanns- 
burg  Mission  was  established  a long  time 
ago,  about  1875  (Strehlow,  1965,  p.  142),  and 
his  father’s  notes  refer  to  a period  twenty  years 
after  contact.  As  far  as  I have  been  able  to 
make  out  from  Strehlow’s  written  material,  he 
provides  no  empirical  support  for  Radcliffe- 
Brown’s  model.  In  fact,  I quote  him  in  my 
1962  paper  as  giving  evidence  that  is  in- 
consistent with  the  model. 

No  one,  I think,  is  satisfied  with  our  methods 
for  reconstructing  the  past.  The  people  that  I 
worked  with  in  Arnhem  Land  had  been  living 
a nomadic  life  until  a year  before  I arrived.  I 
do  not  suggest  that  they  were  completely 
unaffected  by  European  contact;  some  of  them 
had  been  wandering  to  neighboring  missions 
or  even  walking  200  miles  into  Darwin.  In 
1957,  the  government  established  a settlement 
in  their  home  country  and,  once  the  word  got 


148  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

around,  they  all  moved  in  very  quickly,  so  that 
it  was  not  possible  for  me  actually  to  see  an 
indigenous,  nomadic,  ongoing  economy.  But  I 
did  live  for  a month  away  from  the  settlement 
with  a group  of  about  fifty  people,  plotted 
totemic  sites  carefully,  asked  about  boundaries 
(there  were  none),  asked  about  use  of  re- 
sources around  totemic  sites,  and,  in  general, 
observed  about  fifty  people  from  several  differ- 
ent patricians  living  harmoniously  together — 
specifically,  not  arguing  about  the  fact  that 
some  members  of  the  group  were  living  on 
totemic  estates  that  did  not  belong  to  them. 
Similarly,  I recorded  many  disputes  that  had 
occurred,  roughly,  between  1940  and  1 Q57 — 
when  the  people  were  still  living  in  the  area 
largely  unaffected  by  European  settlement. 
These  disputes  were  narrated  in  great  detail, 
and  I found  that  one  of  their  favorite  mne- 
monic devices  for  recalling  disputes  was  the 
memory  of  the  places  where  the  disputes 
happened  and  the  people  who  were  there.  So 
in  the  course  of  describing  a dispute,  an  infor- 
mant would  name  a dozen  or  so  characters;  and 
this  makes  it  possible  to  say  of  a particular 
waterholc  belonging  to  a particular  clan  at  a 
particular  time,  there  were  many  people 
present  who  did  not  belong  to  that  particular 
clan.  All  in  all,  I don’t  think  my  opportunities 
and  methods  were  vastly  inferior  to  Tindale’s 
on  Bentinck  Island. 

Meggitt:  I should  point  out  in  passing  that 
Stanner’s  1965  paper  fails  to  rebut  Hiatt’s 
paper  (1962).  It  might  be  better  construed  as 
an  exercise  in  ancestor  worship. 

Rose  : I also  wish  to  address  myself  to  Bird- 
sell’s  remarks.  I think  one  should  realize  that 
Strehlow  was  dealing  with  the  Western  Aranda 
in  the  early  part  of  the  century,  and  they  had 
in  fact  been  in  contact  with  a white  settlement 
since  about  1875  (an  area  to  the  west  of  them 
was  settled  about  that  time).  He  also  used  the 
genealogical  method,  which  I,  at  least,  try  to 
avoid. 

I must  confess  that  I have  not  yet  read 
Tindale’s  paper  on  Bentinck  Island,  but  I 
would  like  to  comment  on  Tindale’s  reports  on 
the  Groote  Eylandt  people,  who  were  in  a pris- 
tine state  when  he  investigated  them  in  1922 
(Tindale,  1925).  Tindale  took  photographs  of 
groups  of  aboriginals  whom  he  describes  as 
belonging  to  a particular  patrilineal  totemic 


group,  and  I had  these  photographs  identified 
in  1948.  The  identifications  entirely  confirmed 
Hiatt’s  and  Meggitt’s  conclusions,  for  it  turned 
out  that  each  of  the  photographed  groups  be- 
longed to  several  totemic  groups. 

Williams:  I want  to  return  to  Birdsell’s 
ideas  about  reconstructing  local  residence 
arrangements,  about  which  I take  a pessi- 
mistic view.  B.  K.  Sen  published  a paper  in 
1955  (Sen  and  Sen,  1955)  in  which  he  mapped 
the  site  of  a group  of  Birhor  and  specified  the 
membership  of  each  household.  Working  with 
the  same  people,  only  six  years  later  I was  un- 
able to  reconstruct  the  situation  Sen  had 
described.  Furthermore,  after  keeping  track  of 
every  move  over  a fourteen-month  period,  I 
tested  again  by  walking  around  old  sites  with 
the  men  and  asking  them  where  the  houses  had 
been  and  who  had  occupied  them,  and  could 
not  get  consistent  answers  from  man  to  man. 
The  lack  of  ideological  reification  of  the  patri- 
local  group  is  such  that  I suspect  that  if  the 
Birhor  were  put  all  in  one  place,  fifty  years  from 
now,  no  one  would  know  that  he  had  occupied 
a patrilocal  group.  Therefore,  I have  no  confi- 
dence in  our  ability  to  reconstruct  these  things, 
once  the  de  facto  arrangement  has  ceased  to 
exist. 

Woodburn  : I also  want  to  talk  about  formal 
rules  and  problems  of  reconstruction.  I think 
that  with  the  Hadza  it  would  be  quite  impos- 
sible to  get  an  accurate  idea  of  their  system, 
even  in  the  present,  if  one  were  to  rely  merely 
on  informants.  Their  ideas  about  what  they  do 
differ  very  substantially  from  what  they  ac- 
tually do.  One  (and  only  one)  of  the  factors 
that  influences  this  is  the  fact  that  the  Hadza 
are  very  eager  to  gain  the  esteem  of  members  of 
other  tribes.  A great  deal  of  what  they  say  is 
affected  by  this  desire,  especially  when  they 
are  talking  through  interpreters.  When  asked 
about  aspects  of  their  own  amorphous  and 
elusive  social  organization,  which  they  with 
some  justification  fear  would  be  ridiculed  by 
most  outsiders,  they  commonly  take  refuge  in 
describing  the  formal  rules  of  neighboring 
tribes  and  particularly  of  the  Isanzu,  v’1  >m 
they  know  best.  The  Isanzu  have  a matrilineal 
system  which  is  only  imperfectly  understood  by 
most  of  the  Hadza  and  the  sort  of  description 
that  one  is  likely  to  get  as  a result  of  question- 
ing rather  than  observation  is  of  a decidedly 


odd  and  rather  incoherent  form  of  matrilineal 
organization,  whereas  in  fact  they  have  a non- 
unilineal system. 

Gardner:  Several  papers  have  raised  the 
question  of  whether  devolution,  detribaliza- 
tion,  or  cultural  simplification  has  led  to  re- 
tention of  formal  structures  (clan  names, 
formal  rules,  and  so  on)  for  which  there  are  no 
ongoing  practices  that  can  be  observed.  Other 
discussants  have  noted  the  very  frequently 
occurring  situation  in  which  discrepancy  be- 
tween rule  and  practice  can  be  ascribed  to 
additions  rather  than  losses.  The  Paliyans  of 
South  India  are  another  case  in  point.  They 
told  me  that  they  were  patrilocal,  when  by 
Helm’s  procedure  ( 1969  ) for  determining 
de  facto  bilaterality  they  are  53  per  cent  viri- 
local  and  47  per  cent  uxorilocal.  They  say  that 
they  universally  marry  cross-cousins  and 
cross-nieces,  which  21  per  cent  of  them  actually 
do,  but  19  per  cent  marry  parallel-cousins 
and  parallel-nieces,  which  according  to  the 
“rules”  would  be  classificatory  incest.  They 
claim  to  use  Iroquois  kin  terminology,  which 
in  fact  they  do  use  in  front  of  outsiders — 
including  anthropologists — but  by  hearing 
“mistakes”  and  conversations  where  my  pres- 
ence was  not  noted  I found  that  they  use 
Hawaiian  terms  among  themselves.  In  order 
to  appear  respectable  in  culture  contact 
situations,  they  attempt  to  be  orthoprax,  in 
terms  of  the  culture  of  their  neighbors;  but  this 
is  all  very  superficial  and  . recent,  the  “rules” 
are  not  a residue  of  old,  abandoned  institutions. 
This  same  situation  apparently  obtains  among 
the  Mbuti  Pygmies,  and  among  the  Yanadi 
and  Chenchu  of  India. 


17b.  The  Problem  of 
Lineage  Organization 

Speakers:  Damas,  Deetz,  Sinha,  Williams 

Damas  : In  deciding  the  issue  of  the  presence 
or  absence  of  lineal  organization  in  hunting 
people,  we  ought  to  consider  further  the 
question  of  acculturative  influences.  For 
instance,  among  the  Birhor  there  seems  to  be 
some  evidence  that  the  lineages  themselves  may 
be  borrowed  from  surrounding  agricultural 
peoples — who  have  the  same  name  for  the 


Discussions,  Part  III  149 

lineage.  This  raises  a question  in  regard  to 
Williams’s  model  as  to  how  essential  the  lineage 
is.  Specifically,  one  wonders  whether  the 
Birhor  would  have  worked  out  some  alternative 
solution  to  this  adaptive  problem  if  they  had 
not  had  an  opportunity  to  borrow  a solution 
from  their  neighbors. 

Williams:  I think  we  agreed  at  the  1965 
conference  on  Band  Organization1  that  patri- 
local and  patrilineal  bands  should  be  separ- 
ated, and  specifically  over  the  matter  of 
lineage.  Perhaps,  we  can  leave  aside  the 
terminological  questions  and  discuss  specifi- 
cally what  has  been  borrowed.  The  Munda 
and  the  Santal  have  named  clans,  and  these 
are  the  names  that  the  Birhor  have  borrowed. 
I can  assign  no  function  to  the  names  them- 
selves; they  do  not  regulate  marriage.  That  is, 
they  are  not  exogamic  units,  because  one  finds 
marriages  within  named  clans.  These  are  sup- 
posedly patrilineal,  but  I also  found  men  who 
were  agnatically  related  but  gave  themselves 
different  names.  These,  then,  are  borrowed  and 
do  not  fit  the  model. 

On  the  other  hand,  this  is  not  what  I call  a 
lineage.  What  I do  call  a lineage — rightly  or 
perhaps  wrongly,  as  I discover  from  talks 
with  Woodburn — is  a group  of  males  who 
inherit  property.  There  is  very  little  symbolic 
objectification  of  a lineage,  so  to  distinguish  a 
lineage  required  a lot  of  looking.  It  is  true, 
however,  that  each  group  of  males  inherits  a 
pantheon,  and  each  learns  a different  way  of 
treating  it.  Also,  members  of  a lineage  band 
behave  differently  towards  one  another  than 
they  do  in  their  interactions  with  people  out- 
side the  lineage.  For  example,  if  they  are  patri- 
lineally  related  males  and  another  group  of 
patrilineally  related  males  come  to  visit,  they 
move  in  directly;  while  if  the  visiting  group  is 
related  in  any  other  way — e.g.,  in-laws 
through  the  wife — they  first  establish  a camp 
several  hundred  yards  away  and  then  feel  out 
the  social  situation  before  moving^  in.  The 
distance  of  their  camp  from  the  resident  group 
is  a function  of  the  distance  of  their  kinship 
relation. 

Sinha:  I want  to  draw  upon  the  earlier 
reports  by  Roy  on  the  Birhor  of  the  Ranchi 

1.  Held  at  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  Ottawa, 
under  the  chairmanship  of  David  Damas. 


150  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

district,  the  district  neighboring  on  Hazari- 
bagh.  It  appears  in  Roy’s  report  (1925)  that 
the  totemic  clans,  rather  than  the  lineages, 
seem  to  be  quite  important  as  exogamous 
units.  Of  course,  we  cannot  be  very  sure  how 
specific  his  information  was.  But  if  we  go  back 
to  our  previous  idea  of  devolution,  it  could 
possibly  be  the  case  that  the  Birhor  at  some 
time  in  the  past,  like  many  of  the  other 
Munda-speaking  group  of  tribes,  had  totemic 
clans  with  a greater  depth  of  lineages  when 
they  were  practicing  shifting  cultivation. 
Then  we  would  suppose  that  only  the  symbolic 
names  persist;  while  the  operational  units 
have  become  lower-depth  lineages  with  bi- 
lateral compromises.  Does  this  sound  feasible? 

Williams:  It  does  sound  feasible,  at  least. 
Dr.  Sinha  has  already  cited  evidence  on  some 
east-central  hunting  groups  which,  thirty 
years  ago,  were  not  hunting  as  much  as  they 
do  today;  they  were  shifting  agriculturalists. 
This  raises  a suspicion  that  this  condition  has 
been  prevalent  throughout  India.  Also,  there 
is  a general  feeling  that  one  simply  should  not 
find  hunters  in  an  area  in  which  there  has  been 
a high  civilization  for  thousands  of  years.  In 
any  case,  if  they  were  agriculturalists  in  the 
past,  I was  not  able  to  find  any  evidence  for  it 
beyond  the  names  already  mentioned. 

Now,  as  to  Roy’s  data:  I did  not  work  in  his 
area,  nor  do  I know  what  techniques  he  used. 
I can  say,  however,  that  I did  ask  the  Birhor  for 
these  clan  names  and  when  I sat  down  with  an 
informant  and  asked  him  into  which  of  these 
groups  he  would  marry,  he  would  give  me  a 
definite  answer,  an  answer  which,  however, 
bore  no  relation  to  actual  marriage  choices. 

Deetz:  I would  like  to  comment  on  the 
distinction  between  patrilocal  and  patrilineal 
bands.  It  occurs  to  me  that  a territorially 
based  single  patrilocal  extended  family  is  a de 
facto  patrilineage  or,  at  any  rate,  is  so  per- 
ceived by  us.  If,  however,  we  compare  this  to 
a Nuer  patrilineage,  we  should  look  at  the 
type  of  corporate  ownership  that  we  are  dealing 
with.  In  the  case  of  the  Nuer,  the  ownership  is 
of  cattle,  or  of  something  else  tangible.  But  in 
most  cases  in  which  we  speak  of  corporate 
ownership  on  the  part  of  hunting-type  patri- 
local bands,  the  thing  that  is  owned  and  shared 
is  something  infinitely  expandable.  For  ex- 
ample, if  I have  eight  boys  and  sixteen  cattle, 


I can  give  each  boy  two  cows;  while  if  I have 
sixteen  gods,  I can  give  all  sixteen  to  each  of 
the  eight  boys.  Therefore,  we  should  dis- 
tinguish carefully  between  what  we  might  call 
corporate  property  as  opposed  to  corporate 
ideology.  The  real  need  for  sharing  tangible 
material  that  cannot  be  split  down  and  is 
passed  on  unilineally  is  of  a different  order 
from  the  treatment  of  something  like  totems, 
pantheons,  legends,  or  far-distant  geographi- 
cal places,  which  can  be  diffused  in  all  direc- 
tions and  do  not  demand  the  same  sort  of 
corporate  action. 

17c.  Analysis  of  Group  Composition 

Speakers : Anderson,  Balikci,  Helm,  Laughlin, 
R.  Lee,  Marshall,  Slobodin,  Woodburn 

Slobodin:  I have  a question  for  Dr.  Helm. 
I wonder  if  kinship  is  talked  about  in  two 
senses  in  her  paper — kinship  in  posse  and  kin- 
ship in  esse:  i.e.,  the  range  of  possible  kinship, 
as  distinguished  from  kinship  actualized  in 
activities.  When  a couple  or  family  moves  into 
a group  (and  it  turns  out  that  there  is  almost 
always  a sibling  of  one  of  the  spouses  in  the 
group),  they  are  actualizing  one  of  many  pos- 
sibilities. Among  the  Kutchin — for  whom  I 
present  data  (Slobodin,  1962)  similar  to  that 
used  by  Dr.  Helm — first  cousins  are  equated 
with  siblings,  and  it  is  in  fact  very  difficult  for  a 
couple  to  move  into  a group  where  neither 
spouse  has  a sibling.  So  it  has  been  enlightening 
to  me  for  her  to  emphasize  the  importance  of 
this  sibling  relationship.  Pehrson  (1957)  did 
this  for  a northern  pastoral  group.  But  in  both 
cases,  the  relationship  is  specific  to  a purpose 
actualized  there.  It  is  not  a principle  of  kinship 
in  general;  there  is  kinship  involved  in  other 
kinds  of  groups,  too. 

Helm:  I do  not  see  the  distinction  made  by 
Slobodin  between  the  range  of  possible  kinship 
as  distinguished  from  kinship  actualized  in 
activities  as  being  a point  of  confusion  in  my 
paper.  I have  used  the  generic  term  “kinship” 
in  the  same  way  that  I have  used  the  generic 
terms  “resource”  and  “range.”  These  are 
merely  the  most  convenient  and  simple  desig- 
nations that  I could  muster  to  project  the 
broadest  perspective.  I have  taken  pains  in  this 


paper  and  others  (e.g.,  Helm  1965a,  1965b)  to 
specify  the  particular  kinds  of  kin  relationships 
that  are  “actualized  in  activities,”  the  activity 
in  question  being  co-residence  or  contiguous 
residence  as  a socioterritorial  identity.  The 
“actualized”  kind  of  kinship  connection  is  the 
primary  bond  of  sibling-to-sibling  or  child-to- 
parent  as  it  is  “activated”  bilaterally,  from 
either  spouse  of  the  conjugal  pair,  to  allow 
residence  entree  of  that  pair  into  one  or  another 
of  the  groups  where  primary  consanguines 
reside. 

One  non-sociological  variable  that  I see  to 
be  quite  as  important  in  the  creation  and 
duration  of  Dene  local  bands  as  Pilling  sees  it 
in  his  Australian  material  is  progenitiveness 
and  the  physical  survival  of  the  resultant 
sibling  set.  Three  or  four  or  more  siblings  who 
survive  into  adulthood  along  with  a forceful 
father  or  brother  tend  to  stay  together  around 
that  figure,  and  they  are  apt  to  pull  in  male 
affines  as  co-resident  group  members,  as  well. 
Thereby,  the  group  tends  to  endure  in  time 
and  space,  focused  around  the  bilateral  pri- 
mary linkages  between  the  conjugal  pairs  that 
result  from  marriages  by  the  sibling  set,  in- 
cluding the  females  as  well  as  males  of  the  set 
among  the  Dene.  Herein  lies  the  bilaterality 
of  the  Dene  system. 

As  to  the  fact  that  cousins  are  called 
“siblings”  among  the  Kutchin,  this  is  equally 
true  of  the  kinship  terminology  system  of  the 
Dogribs  (and  three  out  of  every  four  Slave 
Indians  give  this  nomenclature  as  well).  But, 
like  the  Kutchin,  every  Dogrib  knows  his 
cousins  from  his  siblings.  Dr.  Slobodin  makes 
that  same  point  I do  when  he  says  that  “it  is, 
in  fact,  very  difficult  for  a [Kutchin]  couple  to 
move  into  a group  where  neither  spouse  has  a 
sibling.”  In  my  paper,  I deal  with  real  siblings, 
not  terminological  “siblings.”  It  is  true  that 
sometimes  the  “effective  sibling  set”  (as  dis- 
cussed in  Helm,  1965a)  may  include  more  than 
uterine  siblings.  I have  cases  of  an  adopted 
sibling  and  of  a parallel  cousin  becoming  the 
leader  of  a uterine  sibling  set.  I think  these 
cases  simply  demonstrate  that  the  basic  two- 
sex  sibling  unit  may  be  socially  extended  for 
the  uses  and  purposes  of  a dominant  male.  The 
fact  that  the  kinship  terminology  allows 
cousins  to  be  termed  as  siblings  may  indeed 
aid  in  the  extension  of  the  fraternal  sentiment, 


Discussions,  Part  III  151 

when  it  is  socially  or  economically  advan- 
tageous to  do  so. 

Woodburn:  I have  been  asked  to  describe 
the  place  of  sibling  ties  in  Hadza  residential 
arrangements  and  also  to  specify  their  system 
of  cousin  terminology. 

In  my  second  paper  in  this  volume  (Chapter 
1 1 ) I have  described  how  the  most  important 
bonds  in  the  composition  of  Hadza  camps  are 
those  between  husband  and  wife  and  those  be- 
tween mother-in-law  and  son-in-law.  These  two 
types  of  dyadic  bond  in  combination  give  rise  to 
a non-corporate  unit  which  has  the  genealogical 
form  ofa  matrilineal  extended  family  and  which 
I describe  as  a simple  residential  unit. 

As  a consequence  of  the  two  types  of  tie  that 
make  up  the  simple  residential  unit,  young 
married  sisters  commonly  live  together  while 
their  mother  is  still  alive,  although  they 
do  not  have  important  property  obligations  to 
each  other.  After  the  death  of  their  mother 
they  may  well  have  married  daughters  of 
their  own,  and  residentially  their  focus  of 
interest  will  be  on  these  daughters  rather  than 
on  their  sisters.  Two  sisters  each  of  whom  is  at 
the  apex  of  a simple  residential  unit  will  often 
live  together  from  time  to  time  but  are 
unlikely  to  live  together  regularly  unless  their 
units  are  additionally  linked  by  other  ties. 
If  the  son  of  a woman  at  the  apex  of  a unit 
marries,  the  unit  he  marries  into  is  unlikely  to 
live  regularly  with  the  unit  of  his  mother  and 
sisters  unless,  again,  there  are  multiple  ties 
between  the  units.  Quite  often  two  or  more 
brothers  marry  into  the  same  unit  or  a brother 
and  a sister  marry  a brother  and  a sister.  In 
one  instance  two  sisters  and  two  brothers  had 
married  two  sisters,  a brother,  and  a half- 
brother.  In  cases  of  this  sort,  where  multiple 
bonds  link  a pair  of  units,  they  are  to  be 
found  together  much  more  frequently  than 
would  otherwise  be  the  case. 

Since  a man  normally  lives  with  his  wife’s 
mother,  he  will  not  find  it  easy  to  maintain 
two  marriages  simultaneously  unless  he  marries 
two  sisters,  which  is  possible  but  disapproved. 
When  a man  does  have  two  wives,  it  is  very 
often  a transitory  stage  between  two  mono- 
gamous marriages.  This  is  apt  to  happen  when 
the  first  marriage  is  not  going  well:  the  man 
marries  another  wife  and  eventually  chooses  to 
maintain  one  or  the  other  of  the  marriages. 


152  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

Rather  surprisingly,  the  cousin  terms  of  the 
Hadza  are  of  Crow  type,  although  in  other 
respects  the  system  is  not  Crow.  The  Hadza 
say  that  a man  should  not  marry  a first 
cousin  of  any  sort,  but  one  occasionally  finds 
cases  of  marriage  with  either  the  parallel  or 
the  cross-cousin.  The  preferred  marriage  is 
a cross-generational  one  with  the  classificatory 
sister’s  daughter,  though,  as  with  any  cross- 
generational  marriage,  it  is  rare  in  practice. 

Lee:  I shall  be  speaking  about  the  Dobe- 
area  !Kung  Bushmen  of  Botswana  (Lee,  1965) 
and  their  neighbors,  the  Nyae  Nyae  IKung 
of  South-West  Africa,  studied  by  Lorna 
Marshall  (1957,  1959,  i960).  Unlike  the 
Hadza,  among  whom  marriage  seems  to  be  a 
transitory  union,  marriage  among  IKung 
Bushmen  is  very  stable,  and  the  nuclear  family 
is  the  basic  cohesive  unit  that  stays  together 
throughout  the  year.  This  does  not  mean  the 
IKung  have  a family  level  of  organization. 
They  live  in  multifamily  groups  of  1 0-50 
individuals  with  modes  at  15  and  25  persons. 

One  must  realize  that  censuses  of  a camp  will 
show  different  totals  from  day  to  day;  the 
15-25  figure,  however,  is  a consistent  central 
tendency.  Thus  the  two  basic  units  of  IKung 
society  are  the  nuclear  family,  and  the  multi- 
family living  group  which  I prefer  to  call  the 
camp,  although  others  may  want  to  call  it  a 
band. 

When  one  tabulates  the  links  within  the 
camp  using  the  method  developed  by  June 
Helm  ( 1969  ),  one  finds  male-male,  male- 
female,  and  female-female  sibling  links,  as  well 
as  affinal  links  of  both  sexes.  Thus  in  terms  of 
genealogical  composition,  the  Dobe  IKung 
camp  looks  very  much  like  the  northern 
Athapaskan  microband. 

Helm  also  pointed  out  that  among  the  Dog- 
rib,  a strong  group  of  siblings  will  tend  to 
attract  male  affines  to  the  task  group.  This  is  a 
prominent  feature  of  IKung  groupings  and 
such  a mode  of  affiliation  may  be  character- 
istic of  other  hunter-gatherer  peoples  as  well. 
Among  the  IKung,  demographic  factors  such 
as  family  size  and  survivorship  account  for 
much  of  the  variance  observed  in  social 
groupings.  Large  families  tend  to  attract 
others,  and  small  families  attach  themselves 
where  they  can;  with  people  moving  as  often 
as  they  do,  it  is  impossible  to  discern  the  opera- 


tion of  jural  rules  of  residence.  The  IKung 
camp  does  not  constitute  in  any  way  a patri- 
local  band.  Following  the  suggestion  of  Knight 
on  the  Naskapi  (1965),  I prefer  to  call  their 
residence  arrangements  “pragmaticolocal.” 
We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that 
where  jural  rules  do  occur,  they  have  built-in 
options.  Consider  the  Bushman  name  relation, 
first  described  by  Lorna  Marshall  (1957).  The 
ascription  of  personal  name  is  ambilateral,  with 
a patrilateral  emphasis.  The  Bushmen  say 
that  the  first  child  of  each  sex  should  be  named 
after  the  paternal  grandparents  and  subsequent 
children  after  the  maternal  grandparents;  in 
practice,  half  of  the  people  have  patri-names 
and  half  matri-names.  Since  each  sibling 
group  is  split  by  the  name  relationship,  no 
unilineal  corporate  entity  can  emerge.  What  is 
more  important  is  the  fact  that  the  name 
relationship  restructures  kinship  terminology. 
If  you  share  a name  with  another  individual, 
then  the  kinship  terms  that  you  use  radiate 
from  the  fact  of  the  common  name,  and  these 
name  partnerships  leapfrog  genealogical  con- 
nections. This  makes  it  difficult  to  talk  about 
kin  term  typologies  since  Ego’s  cousin  terms 
will  be  Eskimo,  or  Crow,  or  Omaha,  depend- 
ing on  his  name  relationship  I 

In  addition  to  the  IKung,  name  sharing  is 
found  among  the  Eskimo  (Guemple,  1965)  and 
among  the  Kaingang  of  South  America 
(Henry,  1941  [1964]).  It  might  be  interesting 
to  determine  whether  name  sharing  is  com- 
mon to  other  hunter-gatherer  groups. 

Marshall:  The  Nyae  Nyae  IKung  and 
Dobe-Area  IKung  have  much  in  common.  I 
found  that  among  the  people  we  worked  with, 
the  ideal  naming  pattern  stated  by  Richard 
Lee  was  followed  consistently.  After  using  the 
names  of  all  the  grandparents  in  proper  order, 
a further  child  was  usually  named  after  one  of 
the  father’s  siblings  or  a sibling’s  spouse.  I 
might  note,  regarding  the  effect  of  common 
naming  upon  kinship  terminology,  that  the 
perspective  that  a person  adopts  is  primarily 
that  of  the  specific  individual  after  whom  he 
is  named.  Since  there  are  relatively  few  names 
to  go  around,  the  chance  sharing  of  a name 
with  several  people  does  not  involve  quite  the 
same  number  of  rules  and  patterns  in  the  use 
of  kinship  terms.  The  people  we  worked  with 
claimed  that  they  did  not  marry  lineal  kin  or 


Discussions,  Part  III 


153 


collaterals  up  through  first  cousins,  and  this 
seemed  to  be  quite  consistently  maintained. 
However,  they  did  frequently  break  another 
stated  marriage  rule  to  the  effect  that  one 
should  not  take  a spouse  having  the  same  name 
as  one’s  own  parent. 

Balikci:  With  reference  to  the  Netsilik 
Eskimos  of  the  Arctic  coast,  I have  asked  my- 
self the  question:  What  keeps  these  people 
together  in  a band  ? And  I have  found  several 
reasons  for  it.  There  are,  of  course,  such  things 
involved  as  kinship  ties,  the  vital  necessity  of 
cooperative  acquisitive  activities,  and  some 
ceremonial  activities.  But  there  is  another  class 
of  social  facts  that  tie  people  together;  namely, 
patterned  dyadic  relationships,  which  seem  to 
be  pretty  important  in  this  area  of  the  Arctic 
coast.  One  can  enumerate  a number  of  these 
dyadic  partnerships — wife-exchange,,  meat- 
sharing (which  are  extremely  rigorous  and  in- 
volve named  dyads),  joking,  avoidance,  trad- 
ing, drumming-singing  (which  sometimes  go 
together  with  wife-exchange  partnerships), 
wrestling,  old-friend,  and  name-sharing.  All 
these  partnerships  are  reciprocal,  and  most  of 
the  time  they  are  contractual;  although  meat 
partners  are  given  to  children  soon  after  birth. 
These  are  peace-making  devices  in  the  camp 
that  both  cut  across  kinship  lines  and  tie  ex- 
tended families  together.  Sometimes  such 
dyadic  relationships  are  ambivalent,  especially 
in  the  case  of  wife-exchange  partnership. 
After  exchanging  wives  over  a period  of 
months,  husbands  are  likely  to  begin  disliking 
one  another  and  wind  up  as  enemies  instead  of 
friends.  This  is  manifest  in  the  songs  sung  at 
the  drum  dances.  I wonder  whether  dyadic 
relationships  play  as  important  a role  in  other 
hunter-gatherer  bilateral  societies. 

Laughlin:  I think  it  is  interesting  that 
dyadic  and  name  relationships  have  survived 
in  rather  robust  form  in  the  Aleutian  islands, 
where  the  population  has  been  severely  limited 
and  where  there  have  been  some  serious 
changes.  One  of  the  most  common  practices 
is  that  of  naming  after  a common  event.  There 
is  also  a reciprocal  use  of  single  kinship  terms, 
so  that  two  persons  may  be  calling  each  other 
uncle.  Another  important  relationship  that 
shows  up  occasionally  among  the  Eskimo  is 
called  anakiisak.  When  a person  is  born,  an 
older  persons  is  named  his  anakiisak  or  pro- 


tector. The  older  person  is  supposed  to  protect 
the  infant  through  all  the  stages  of  life  and  in 
embarrassing  circumstances  (hence,  if  a child 
wets  on  the  floor,  an  old  woman  may  do  the 
same  thing,  in  order  to  partake  in  the  shame). 
When  the  young  person  gets  older  and  his 
anakiisak  gets  very  old,  the  younger  one  helps 
the  older  one  out  of  this  world.  This  seems  to 
function  to  a considerable  degree  today,  more, 
perhaps,  in  the  Aleutians  than  in  Kodiak  or  in 
western  Alaska.  There  are  other  such  relation- 
ships. The  two  men  that  went  out  in  the  two- 
hatched  kayak  were  “partners”;  they  had  to 
get  along.  Some  magic  was  possible  there,  and 
some  deaths  resulted. 

Anderson  : Concerning  the  analysis  of  group 
composition,  the  issues  which  I wish  to  empha- 
size represent  the  other  side  of  the  coin  of 
arguments  presented  by  Sahlins  (1965)  on  the 
relationship  of  group  ideology  and  group  com- 
position. Of  course,  this  is  not  an  either/or 
matter.  Deriving  structure  from  ideology  or 
composition  involves  different  activities  but 
both  have  value.  These  analytical  activities  are 
complementary.  Acknowledging  this,  I will 
emphasize  the  group  composition  side  in  order 
to  relate  a number  of  points  which  have 
emerged  in  the  papers  and  discussions. 

One  of  the  quite  general  findings  concerns 
what  has  been  termed  fluidity  in  group  com- 
position and  group  size  over  time.  Though 
shifting  group  affiliations  do  not  surprise  us, 
the  high  frequency  of  their  occurrence  among 
hunters  and  collectors  does  warrant  further 
investigation.  From  the  examples  we  have  been 
presented,  they  appear  to  occur  (though  prob- 
ably with  differing  frequency)  among  relatively 
settled  as  well  as  nomadic  peoples,  where 
orientation  is  lineal  as  well  as  bilateral,  where 
territorial  attachment  of  groups  is  tight  or 
loose,  and  where  the  habitat  is  relatively 
richly  or  poorly  endowed.  Indeed,  if  fluidity  of 
group  affiliation  is  as  general  as  it  seems,  then 
hunting  and  gathering  peoples  would  appear 
to  be  not  only  what  Sahlins  terms  the  “original 
affluent  society”  but  also  the  “original  mobile 
society,”  at  least  in  terms  of  residence  arrange- 
ments. And  if  in  the  original  affluent  society 
wants  are  restricted,  then  in  the  original  mobile 
society  shifting  alignments  permit  individuals 
and  families  to  maximize  fulfillment  of  their 
wants  (material  and  non-material). 


154  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

By  “fluidity”  in  the  composition  of  social 
units  and  “residential  mobility,”  I am  sum- 
marizing an  apparently  widespread  but  not 
universal  feature  of  hunting  and  gathering 
societies  which  is  to  be  distinguished  from 
strictly  seasonal  fragmentation  or  shifts.  The 
Ainu  have  seasonal  residential  shifts  as  do  all 
hunters  and  gatherers,  but  Dr.  Watanabe’s 
reports  do  not  indicate  fluidity  in  camp  com- 
position. Neither  Hiatt  nor  Williams  report  it 
either,  though  Balikci,  Damas,  Helm,  Lee, 
Marshall,  Slobodin,  Suttles,  Turnbull,  and 
Woodburn  have  reported  a situation  of  fairly 
continuous  realignments  of  individuals  or 
families.  In  fact,  a number  of  the  latter  indicate 
that  fluidity  of  alignments  is  so  great  that  the 
entities  formed  do  not  meet  the  usual  definition 
of  band  or  group.  Balikci,  Laughlin,  Sharp, 
Turnbull,  and  Woodburn  have  emphasized 
the  relative  importance  of  various  patterned 
reciprocal  dyadic  relationships  over  groups 
integrated  by  normative  or  functional  ties. 
This  is  more  than  merely  semantics.  The  use  of 
the  term  “group”  or  “band”  for  local  or  task 
units  among  some  of  the  cases  may  even  lead  to 
a faulty  conception  of  observed  social  inter- 
actions. The  terms  “aggregate,”  “unit,”  or 
“network”  would  seem  to  be  more  appropriate 
in  describing  certain  local  or  activity-oriented 
units.  On  reexamination,  some  units  identified 
as  “bands”  could  turn  out  to  be  what  Dr. 
Sharp  has  characterized  as  overlapping  “ego- 
centered  sets  of  societies.”  And  even  where 
groups  are  established,  reciprocal  dyadic  ties 
which  frequently  reinforce  or  provide  addi- 
tional bases  of  alliance  are  worthy  of  fuller 
investigation  (cf.  Chapter  17I1). 

Three  other  corrective  findings  are  provided 
from  the  papers  and  discussions.  First,  ex- 
clusive territoriality  with  territorial  defense  by 
a fixed  group  of  people  is  rare  at  best.  However, 
association  between  a named  land  area  and  a 
fairly  stable  social  unit  is  common,  whether 
the  centripetal  factor  is  a totemic  spot,  a re- 
source place,  a water  hole,  or  a “home  base,” 
i.e.,  a relatively  limited  range  within  a wider 
area  to  which  the  activities  of  aged,  young,  sick 
and  reproducing  persons  are  restricted.  Sec- 
ond, in  a number  of  hunting  and  gathering 
peoples  it  is  difficult  to  elicit  norms  of  residence, 
descent,  or  marriage,  the  commonly  signifi- 


cant rules  in  group  structure.  Third,  there 
appears  to  be  more  specialization  for  certain 
tasks  among  hunters  than  has  been  stressed  up 
to  now. 

With  these  findings  in  mind,  I wish  to  re- 
turn to  the  question  of  why  fluidity  in  group 
composition  may  be  such  a common  feature 
for  hunters  and  gatherers.  It  has  already  been 
mentioned  that  chance  demographic  factors 
may  impose  difficulties  on  those  peoples  having 
well-defined  norms  of  group  structure  to  follow. 
Among  hunters  whose  rules  are  less  precisely 
stated,  certain  patterned  but  less  formal  prac- 
tices confer  a degree  of  constancy  in  group 
composition.  With  the  Dogrib,  the  IKung,  and 
the  Tiwi,  sibling  and  affinal  bonds  are  of 
primary  importance  in  affiliating  families. 
With  the  Hadza,  sibling  ties  are  of  less  impor- 
tance than  those  uniting  a mother  and  her 
married  offspring  (especially  mother-daughter) 
and  those  between  spouses.  Age  ties  and  sib- 
ling ties  are  factors  among  the  Mbuti  Pygmies. 
Among  other  hunting  peoples,  spouse  ex- 
change, adoption,  ritual  obligations,  and 
friendship  provide  some  continuity.  I find  es- 
pecially intriguing  Dr.  Woodburn’s  and  Dr. 
Turnbull’s  remarks  on  the  one  hand  about  the 
lack  of  commitment  or  loyalty  of  hunter  to  one 
another,  and  on  the  other  hand  that  inter- 
personal bonds  are  purely  expedient.  If  such  a 
lack  of  commitment  to  others  and  a view  of 
relationships  as  expedient  has  wider  currency 
among  hunters,  then  the  importance  of 
dyadic  ties  and  of  fluidity  of  group  composition 
are  more  easily  understood.  I think  that  we 
can  reject  Dr.  Woodburn’s  lead  that  lack  of 
commitment  is  related  to  lack  of  dependence 
on  others  for  access  to  things.  The  fact  that  the 
majority  of  Hadza  men  are  “hangers  on”  as 
regards  kills  of  'meat  belies  a lack  of  indepen- 
dence, especially  since  size  of  meat  portion 
distributed  is  a factor  in  budding  off.  Mainte- 
nance of  a broad  series  of  reciprocally  validated 
exchange  bonds  with  kinsmen,  affines,  friends, 
partners,  etc.,  certainly  provides  fullest  security 
in  circumstances  which  are  apt  to  be  rather 
constantly  changing.  Where  alternatives  for 
access  to  wants  change  not  only  with  fluctua- 
tions in  resources  but  also  with  fluctuations  in 
demography  of  the  social  unit,  it  is  difficult  to 
plan  ahead.  But  what  better  security  is  there 


for  the  future  than  to  keep  a wide  range  of 
strategic  social  ties  “warm”? 

The  emphasis  on  informal  and  dyadic  align- 
ments and  the  fluidity  of  many  hunter  and 
gatherer  peoples  can  thus  be  seen  to  have  some 
advantageous  consequences.  The  presence  of  a 
range  of  options  by  which  individuals  and 
families  pursue  their  best  interests  at  any  time 
may  be  viewed  as  a workable,  if  imperfect, 
cybernetic  system.  Shifting  arrangements  based 
upon  best  options  within  the  guidelines  of  social 
rules  or  preferences  (as  far  as  is  possible)  may 
most  effectively  relate  a hunting  population  to 
short-term  fluctuations  in  resources  and  con- 
ditions of  life,  as  Lee,  Alland,  and  others 
suggest.  Social  flexibility  allows  for  optimal 
exploitation  of  the  preferred  effective  resources 
by  the  total  population,  including  ill  and  aged 
as  well  as  the  able.  And,  as  a number  of  con- 
ferees have  suggested,  fission  may  be  the  princi- 
pal means  of  regulating  interpersonal  conflict. 
On  the  other  hand,  as  Dr.  Balikci  suggests, 
reciprocal  dyadic  relationships — which  cross- 
cut social  bonds  established  on  kinship  or 
family  ties — are  peacemaking  devices.  Clearly 
more  data  on  these  relationships  are  needed. 

Finally,  that  the  above  is  possible  does  not 
militate  against  the  suggestion  by  Sahlins  and 
others  (e.g.,  Rappaport,  1966)  that  ideology 
and  rules  may  have  adaptive  advantages  over 
longer  term  fluctuations. 


i7d.  Social 

Determinants  of  Group  Size 

Speakers:  L.  Binford,  Helm , Williams , Woodburn 

Binford:  I would  like  to  ask  Bob  Williams 
to  elaborate  on  his  comment  that  there  may  be 
size  limitations  to  various  organizational 
features  of  society.  For  example,  what  are  the 
maximum  sizes  of  groups  that  may  cooperate 
without  having  affinal  ties  or  other  articula- 
tions which  arise  not  out  of  face-to-face  inter- 
action but  out  of  some  symbolic  partitioning  of 
society?  It  seems  that  many  of  the  people  who 
have  presented  material  on  composite  bands 
have  mentioned  the  size  range  of  15-25  people. 
What  factors  would  operate  to  limit  local 


Discussions,  Part  III  155 

group  size?  What  factors  seem  to  lead  to  an 
optimum  size  of  15-25? 

Williams:  In  my  own  group,  it  is  difficult  to 
tell  what  is  cause  and  what  is  effect.  For 
instance,  the  marriage  requirements  are  such 
that  a man  cannot  arrange  to  bring  a bride  for 
his  son  without  help.  He  cannot  get  the 
needed  help  unless  he  is  co-resident  with  the 
people  who  are  to  help  him.  And  I have  seen 
people  move  back  in  with  others  of  their  patri- 
line  in  order  to  get  this  kind  of  help.  This 
would  suggest  that  such  a type  of  cooperation 
is  necessary,  but  one  can  see  the  causality  in 
two  possible  ways.  This  might  be  a device  that 
ensures  a certain  group  size,  or — taking  a 
functionalist  point  of  view — one  might  say  that 
the  bride’s  family  is  ensuring  that  there  is  a 
kinship  group  of  adequate  size  to  take  care  of 
their  daughters.  This,  like  many  other  things, 
regulates  the  size  of  the  band,  but  it  is  always 
hard  to  distinguish  cause  and  effect.  But  the 
very  presence  of  such  non-economic  factors — 
as  mentioned  also  by  Turnbull — assures  us  that 
group  size  is  not  determined  merely  by  ecology 
and  economy. 

Woodburn:  I argue  that  the  environment 
and  technology  of  the  Hadza  set  only  very 
broad  limits  to  the  possible  sizes  of  camps.  In 
practice,  one  finds  camps  containing  from  one 
to  a hundred  people;  the  average  camp 
contains  about  eighteen  adults.  One  factor 
that  seems  to  set  a rough  upper  limit  on  the 
number  of  people  in  a camp  is  the  size,  and 
not  the  number,  of  animals  killed.  By  custom 
the  meat  of  an  animal  is  divided  widely  among 
the  members  of  a camp.  Hadza  have  a fairly 
definite  notion  of  what  constitutes  a reasonable 
individual  portion  of  meat  and  if  they  do  not 
get  this  amount,  people  may  begin  to  move  out. 
The  good  hunters  are  especially  likely  to  leave. 

Helm:  Is  there  any  way  in  which  a good 
hunter  can  control  a large  group  of  strangers 
following  him? 

Woodburn:  None  at  all.  It  is  striking  that 
among  the  Hadza  most  of  the  hunting  is  done 
by  a small  proportion  of  the  men.  As  I have 
mentioned  earlier,  perhaps  as  many  as  half  of 
the  adult  Hadza  men  kill  fewer  than  one  large 
animal  per  head  per  year.  Many  men  eat  more 
meat  than  they  contribute  and  the  good 
hunters  just  put  up  with  this  situation. 


156  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 
lye.  Resolving  Conflicts  by  Fission 

Speakers:  Hamburg , Hiatt,  Turnbull,  Woodburn 

Hamburg:  Dr.  Turnbull  has  put  consider- 
able emphasis  on  the  utilization  of  fluid  band 
composition  for  the  resolution  or  avoidance  of 
conflict.  Can  you  say  something  more  about 
the  sources  of  such  conflict  ? 

Turnbull:  Among  the  Mbuti,  conflicts 
usually  involve  anxiety  over  marital  prob- 
lems. Perhaps  due  to  the  composite  nature  of 
the  band,  there  is  a good  deal  of  sister  ex- 
change, and  this  leads  to  obvious  conflicts  of 
loyalty  between  brothers  or  between  a man 
and  his  wife.  Occasionally,  there  is  conflict 
over  food  but  very  little  over  property — some- 
times a minor  theft,  perhaps.  The  sources  of 
conflict  seem  rather  trivial  and  sometimes  are 
even  invented.  I think  they  represent  simply 
the  great  internal  tensions  that  build  up  during 
a period  of  hunting  under  very  close  con- 
ditions. 

Hiatt:  I wonder  whether  Dr.  Turnbull 
could  identify  the  cohesive  factors — both  of 
ideology  and  self-interest. 

Turnbull:  Among  the  Mbuti — where  prac- 
tically all  the  tendencies  seem  to  be  towards 
fission — the  one  really  strong  cohesive  factor 
is  simply  the  forest  itself.  This  is  where  the 
religious  aspect  comes  in.  The  forest  is  the  only 
constant  in  their  lives;  there  are  no  allegiances 
among  themselves  as  individuals  or  as  families 
to  which  they  can  look  for  a feeling  of  con- 
stancy. As  I said  before,  a band  can  only  be 
defined  as  that  group  of  individuals  who  are 
living  and  hunting  in  a certain  territory  at  a 
certain  time.  The  composition  of  the  band  is 
always  changing,  but  the  band  as  an  ideal 
continues  to  exist  within  a given  territory.  So 
there  is  a feeling  of  loyalty  towards  the  terri- 
tory. In  times  of  fission,  the  Mbuti  are  thrown 
upon  themselves  and  upon  this  relationship  to 
the  forest.  Their  activities  become  less  and  less 
communal  until  finally,  at  the  height  of  the 
honey  season,  individual  men,  women,  and 
even  children  go  out  alone  and  live  off  the 
forest.  There  is  a clear  idea  of  the  enormous 
generosity  of  the  forest,  and  the  structural 
importance  of  this  recognition  is  seen  in  the  fact 
that  the  bounty  and  benevolence  of  the  forest 
form  the  major  topics  of  discussion  in  times  of 


crisis,  just  as  they  form  the  basis  of  the  great 
religious  songs,  which  more  than  anything  bind 
Mbuti  society  together. 

Although  I am  not  yet  sure,  I strongly  sus- 
pect that  the  Ik  have  a similar  feeling  about 
their  environment.  In  their  own  lives  there  is 
no  room  for  affection  as  we  understand  it; 
couples  and  families  break  up,  and  women 
abandon  children  to  decrepit  grandparents — 
apparently  without  remorse.  They  are  a rather 
cold  and  calculating  people,  and  relationships 
are  seen  in  terms  of  expediency.  But  one  does 
sense  a feeling  of  affection  and  of  a unifying 
bond  when  one  sees  them  sitting  at  the  band’s 
sitting  place — a rocky  outcrop,  chosen  for  its 
view.  In  times  of  anxiety,  they  will  sit  there 
and  gaze  across  the  mountains  and  valleys  and 
seem  to  feel  affection  for  them.  Like  the  Mbuti, 
the  Ik  also  recognize  that  the  environment 
provides  them  the  necessities  of  life. 

Woodburn:  The  Hadza  make  use  of  en- 
vironmental explanations  to  justify  nomadic 
movements  which  ease  conflict.  When  people 
do  move  or  leave  a camp  because  of  conflict, 
they  very  often  give  an  ecological  reason  for 
their  movements.  They  suddenly  discover  that 
the  berries  somewhere  else  are  better.  By  giving 
such  a neutral  ecological  explanation,  they 
solve  disputes  simply  by  refusing  to  acknowl- 
edge them. 

17L  Territorial  Boundaries 
Speakers:  Hiatt,  R.  Lee,  Pilling 

Pilling  : Regarding  territoriality,  to  say  that 
boundaries  are  totally  absent  among  hunters  is 
an  oversimplification.  Let  me  draw  examples 
from  my  knowledge  of  the  Tiwi  of  North  Aus- 
tralia. Certain  sectors  of  the  boundaries  of 
territories  belonging  to  some  of  their  local 
groups  are  fairly  exact;  however,  this  is  true 
primarily  where  the  boundaries  coincide  with 
wide  bodies  of  water,  and  even  in  these 
instances — I ' should  note — I never  heard  of 
boundaries  having  a fixed  location  on  the  sur- 
face (or  bottom)  of  such  a body  of  water. 

To  understand  the  location  of  boundaries  on 
land,  it  should  be  noted  that  among  the  Tiwi 
the  countryside  is  covered  by  a large  number 
of  small  named  localities  with  only  vaguely 


Discussions,  Part  III 


•57 


defined  limits,  somewhat  in  the  way  that  a 
farmer  in  America  or  England  has  names  for 
localities  on  the  land  he  owns  or  works.  In 
most  instances,  these  Tiwi-named  localities 
were  within  the  territory  of  one  local  group. 
However,  a few  were  neutral,  or  buffer, 
localities  between  the  territories  of  different 
local  groups;  in  such  areas  members  of  either 
local  group  could  camp,  even  when  members 
of  the  other  local  group  were  also  camped  there. 

On  one  occasion,  I was  traveling  with  some 
men  near  the  center  of  Melville  Island,  and 
one  said:  “This  is  where  (so-and-so  named 
locality)  ends,  and  this  is  where  (so-and-so 
other  named  locality)  begins.”  I already  knew 
that  one  of  these  localities  was  a netural  area, 
and  the  other  was  considered  to  be  in  the 
territory  of  a specific  local  group.  Therefore,  I 
was  hearing  a statement  that  in  this  one 
instance  the  land  boundary  was  a sharp 
boundary.  When  I asked  my  Tiwi  traveling 
companions  about  the  sharpness  of  this  boun- 
dary, they  showed  their  impatience  at  my 
ignorance;  for  the  name  of  the  neutral  area 
was  ecologically  specific,  meaning  “the  area 
where  (so-and-so  tree)  grows,”  and  that  grove 
happened  to  have  a sharp  edge.  Therefore,  the 
application  of  the  specific  local  geographical 
term  meant  that  there  was  a sharp  boundary. 
Thus,  there  are  few  instances  among  the  Tiwi 
where  there  is  a very  precise  edge  to  the  terri- 
tory of  a local  group. 

But  it  should  be  stressed  that  in  Tiwi  think- 
ing these  boundaries  seem  to  be  a by-product 
of  application  of  an  ecologically  related  word, 
and  not  the  product  of  the  presence  of  a con- 
cept of  precise,  fence  or  line-like  boundaries. 

Hiatt  : I found  something  similar  to  this. 
The  typical  situation,  I think,  is  one  in  which 
there  is  a cluster  of  named  totemic  or  non- 
totemic  sites  that  form  what  Stanner  (1965) 
has  called  a “heartland.”  Between  one  heart- 
land and  the  next,  there  is  usually  no  sharp 
boundary;  there  is  an  area  between  the  two 
about  which  no  one  cares  much.  But  I did 
find  one  or  two  cases  of  the  sort  of  thing  that 
Dr.  Pilling  was  talking  about.  One  totemic  site 
was  a sand  ridge  which  was  said  to  have  been 
formed  by  a totemic  sea  monster.  The  people 
in  talking  of  this  site  could  say  quite  explicitly, 
“This  is  the  end  of  Yiridja  and  the  beginning 
of  Dua.”  But  this  situation  is  very  uncommon. 


Lee:  Culturally  defined  boundaries  do  not 
necessarily  imply  sanctions  against  trespass. 
You  can  achieve  the  same  ecological  and  social 
effect  by  having  rules  for  accommodating 
people  across  boundaries  as  when  there  are  no 
boundaries  at  all.  All  of  the  hunting  peoples 
we  have  been  discussing  have  the  institutional- 
ized means  for  moving  from  group  to  group. 
So  if  we  find  boundaries  in  a given  case,  we 
should  not  commit  the  frequent  error  of  assum- 
ing that  they  enclose  a defended  and  exclusive 
territory. 

1 7g.  Predation  and  Warfare 

Speakers : Chagnon,  Hiatt,  R.  Lee,  Owen,  Pilling, 
Wood  burn 

Owen  : One  of  the  factors  in  the  reduction  of 
the  western  North  American  hunters  and 
gatherers  has  been  the  attrition  on  them  from 
surrounding  agriculturalists.  No  one  has  men- 
tioned yet  that  hunters  and  gatherers  some- 
times hunt  domestic  animals,  which  often 
results  in  the  domestic  people  hunting  the  wild 
ones,  so  to  speak.  I wonder  whether  anyone 
else  has  observations  to  make  about  population 
control  exerted  by  neighbors. 

Lee:  The  425  !Kung  Bushmen  of  the  Dobe 
area  share  their  range  amicably  with  340 
Herero  and  Tswana  pastoralists.  This  situation 
has  not  developed  into  the  “patron-client” 
relationship  of  the  Mbuti,  but  neither  is  it  one 
of  constant  warfare.  They  have  reached  a 
modus  vivendi  over  a period  of  forty  years,  and 
cattle  theft  by  Bushmen  occurs  now  on  an 
average  of  only  once  in  several  years.  The  last 
case  of  a Bushman  murdering  a Mutswana 
occurred  in  1946,  and  this  dispute  involved 
women,  not  livestock. 

Woodburn:  The  Hadza  do  not  often  come 
into  conflict  with  their  neighbors.  There  have 
been  a few  violent  encounters  with  the  pastoral 
Tatoga,  who  gain  the  esteem  of  their  fellow 
tribesmen  by  killing  members  of  other  tribes. 
As  many  Tatoga  as  Hadza  seem  to  have  died 
in  these  encounters,  but  they  are  not  an 
important  cause  of  mortality  for  either  tribe. 

The  Hadza  talk  of  a time  before  the  arrival 
of  Europeans  when  they  had  to  conceal  their 
camps  more  than  they  do  today  and  when  they 


158  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

built  their  fires  in  holes  in  the  ground  to  avoid 
detection  at  night.  They  say  they  had  many 
enemies  then.  But  it  is  now  impossible  to  judge 
whether  many  people  were  killed  by  enemies. 
In  recent  years  there  have  been  one  or  two 
cases  of  Hadza  hunting  domesticated  animals 
and  in  one  of  these  a Hadza  was  murdered. 

Chagn»n:  So  far,  we  have  concerned  our- 
selves with  settlement  patterns  and  distribution 
of  peoples  largely  in  terms  of  economics.  Now 
it  seems  that  we  have  drifted  into  the  context  of 
conflict  and  warfare  of  hunters  in  a world  of 
non-hunters,  as  Sahlins  puts  it.  I would  like  to 
hear  from  those  who  have  studied  the  Austra- 
lian aborigines  about  the  effects  of  warfare 
between  bands  on  the  distribution  of  the 
groups.  By  “warfare”  I mean  any  hostile 
relationship  between  autonomous  groups  that 
may  alter  their  seasonal  pattern.  For  example, 
while  the  distribution  of  food  might  make  it 
advisable  for  them  to  split  up  during  the  year, 
perhaps  fear  of  night  attack  or  of  witchcraft 
from  a neighboring  group  might  preclude  their 
breaking  up  into  indefensible  collecting  groups. 

Pilling:  On  the  question  of  warfare  and 
feud,  I would  like  to  draw  on  material  from 
the  very  vivid  memory  culture  of  Tiwi  infor- 
mants who  had  lived  this  way  of  life  in  their  early 
adulthood.  The  night  raids  were  effectively 
terminated,  about  1912,  when  Sir  Baldwin 
Spencer  was  inadvertently  injured  by  a Tiwi 
during  a spear-throwing  demonstration.  It  was 
apparently  made  very  clear  at  that  time  that 
the  continuation  of  spear-throwing  and  the 
use  of  guns  (which  had  come  into  use  for 
night  raiding)  would  no  longer  be  tolerated  by 
the  Europeans.  This  Spencer  incident  was 
correlated  with  the  end  of  night  raiding  and 
sneak  attacks  and  it  appeared  to  have  stopped 
pitch  battles  producing  death.  But,  in  fact,  as 
late  as  1948  death-causing  battles  with  clubs 
were  still  occurring.  My  chief  informant,  the 
major  leader  of  one  faction,  survived  this  1948 
battle  only  by  having  nearly  all  the  doctors  in 
the  Darwin  Hospital  in  attendance  upon  him 
for  many  hours,  performing  brain  surgery.  (It 
appears  that  the  administrators  were  fearful 
that  the  Tiwi,  armed  with  guns,  might  cause 
a major  stir,  if  this  leader  died.  National  and 
international  news  releases  of  such  a story 
might  reflect  unfavorably  upon  the  adminis- 
trators.) Club  battles  lasted,  although  without 


death-causing  injuries,  until  at  least  1953,  even 
in  the  face  of  the  threat  of  strong  sanctions 
against  them  from  Europeans. 

Under  the  old  pattern,  sneak  attack  was 
sufficiently  common  that  informants  spoke  of 
special  ecological  adjustments  to  it.  When  local 
group  A managed  in  a raid  to  kill  a man  in 
opposing  local  group  B,  retaliation  was  to  be 
expected.  Normally,  a female  intermediary — 
living  in  local  group  B,  but  born  in  the  terri- 
tory of  local  group  A — came  to  A to  warn  them 
of  future  planned  retaliation  by  B.  At  this,  the 
threatened  group  A was  likely  to  move  to  the 
mangroves,  a very  specialized  and  unpleasant 
ecological  niche  with,  among  other  things, 
crocodiles  and  a slosny  mud  floor.  Some  of  my 
older  informants,  who  had  lived  under  these 
conditions,  considered  it  a blessing  when  the 
pattern  of  sneak  attack  was  terminated  in 
1912.  Apparently,  camps  in  the  mangroves 
were  never  larger  than  that  of  a married  couple 
with  children,  and  they  might  have  to  live  in 
this  manner  for  as  long  as  several  months.  The 
hiding  in  mangroves  ended  when  an  adult  male 
of  the  group  hiding  was  apprehended  and 
killed  by  the  enemy,  or  when  an  exchange  of 
messages  indicated  another  means  than  sneak 
attack  would  be  used  to  even  the  score.  These 
alternative  means  of  evening  the  score  in- 
cluded pitched  spear-battles  or  a planned 
context  for  counter-injury,  but  in  either  of 
these  cases  deaths  would  have  been  considered 
improper. 

It  is  important  to  note  the  incidence  of 
fatalities  associated  with  the  old  pattern  of 
sneak  attacks  and  the  way  of  life  with  which  it 
was  correlated.  In  one  decade  (1893-1903),  at 
least  sixteen  males  in  the  25-10-45  age  group 
were  killed  in  feuding;  either  during  sneak 
attacks  or  in  arranged  pitch  battles.  Those 
killed  represented  over  10  per  cent  of  all  males 
in  that  age  category,  which  was  the  age  group 
of  the  young  fathers. 

1 7h.  Hunter  Social  Organization: 

Some  Problems  of  Method 

Speaker:  Sharp 

Sharp:  Let  me  continue  to  try  to  sum  up 
some  of  the  issues  that  have  been  raised  here. 


Discussions,  Part  III 


59 


One  thing  that  strikes  and  humbles  me  is  the 
smallness  of  our  sample,  both  in  the  number  of 
peoples  studied  by  those  present  here  and,  even 
more  generally,  as  shown  by  Professor  Mur- 
dock's paper.  And  for  many  of  the  tribes  that 
we  do  know  about,  we  still  have  only  very 
fragmentary  data,  which  points  up  the  urgency 
of  ethnographic  research  to  increase  the  sample 
upon  which  we  can  draw  in  considering  such 
a problem  as  the  nature  of  the  social  unit. 

A second  major  defect  in  our  data  is  the 
lack  of  situational  material,  material  in  con- 
text. This  lack  raised  a number  of  problems 
earlier,  for  example,  the  problems  of  ethno- 
graphic reconstruction.  Should  we  try  to  limit 
outselves  to  pure  forms,  and  reject  material 
that  comes  to  us  only  in  complex  and  accultur- 
ative  situations  ? These  questions  arise  in  any 
ethnographic  research  and  have  to  be  dealt 
with  as  they  arise.  For  the  future,  I am  fairly 
sanguine  about  the  help  that  we  can  get  from 
our  archeological,  ethnohistorical,  and  his- 
torical colleagues  if  we  leave  the  channels  open 
for  collaboration  and  communication — which, 
of  course,  is  one  of  the  prime  reasons  for  this 
symposium. 

The  Importance  of  Longer  Field  Studies 

To  overcome  the  evils  of  the  old  hit-and-run 
ethnography  of  which  many  of  us  have  been 
guilty,  we  need  longer-term  field  studies  and 
follow-up  studies  to  get  descriptions  of  process. 
This  is  necessary  also  to  give  us  longer  runs  for 
statistical  handling.  For  example,  I have  never 
discovered  whether  there  is  any  validity  to  the 
fascinating  statistic  that  I drew  from  two 
censuses,  three  years  apart,  of  the  Yir  Yoront 
on  Cape  York,  which  showed  a birth  ratio  of 
125  males  to  every  100  females  (a  ratio  that 
was  corrected  in  later  age  as  males  died  from 
snakes,  sharks,  fighting,  etc.).  Do  the  anxieties 
of  hunting  life  somehow  affect  the  chemistry  of 
conception,  or  is  it  simply  the  accidental  result 
of  a two-year  census,  as  opposed  to  a longer 
one?  The  dangers  of  extrapolating  from  our 
few  data  are  great. 

Longer-term  studies  will  tell  us  something 
more  about  the  matter  of  devolution.  Societies, 
that  seem  to  be  going  downhill  have  all  the 
greater  claim  to  be  studied.  Dr.  Gardner  men- 
tioned the  Phi  Tong  Luang  in  northern 


Thailand  (Bernatzik,  1938  [1958]),  who  are 
undoubtedly  hunters.  But,  apparently,  they 
are  the  survivors  of  a domestic  slave  group 
freed  by  a prince  of  Nan  and  sent  into  the  bush. 
They  had  no  technical  knowledge  beyond 
sweeping  floors  and  arranging  flowers,  and, 
presumably,  fell  back  to  a hunting  subsistence 
level.  They  are  being  studied,  but  only  inade- 
quately; yet  we  know  that  they  were  reported 
very  early,  long  before  Bernatzik  first  published 
on  them.  Aside  from  the  matter  of  their  pre- 
sumed origin,  we  should  be  interested  by  the 
perseverance  of  this  group  in  the  midst  of  the 
rice  culture  and  court  civilization  of  Siam. 

Definition  of  Social  Units 

The  question  of  units  still  needs  a good  bit  of 
work,  both  in  the  study  and  in  the  field.  Family 
and  kin  structures  appear  to  be  manageable; 
we  can  build  band  units,  hunting  groups,  etc., 
either  in  terms  of  an  aggregation  of  family 
units  or  as  segments  of  family  groups.  But  we 
still  have  trouble  with  the  suprafamily  or  the 
reconstituted  subcommunity  units.  Again,  this 
problem  is  not  limited  in  ethnographic  studies 
to  hunters  alone;  Leach  (1943,  1961),  Lehman 
(1963),  and  others  have  worried  about  it  with 
regard  to  tribal  studies.  It  is  even  a problem — 
at  least,  in  Southeast  Asia — in  regard  to  states ; 
we  Europeans  come  in  with  a conception  of 
states  with  fixed  boundaries  and  find  that  in 
precontact  times  there  was  a much  more 
flexible  and  overlapping  system  in  effect.  The 
whole  matter  is  still  biased  by  the  imposition  of 
prefabricated  constructs — the  patrician,  the 
horde,  and  the  band — which  we  gd  looking  for. 

The  construct  of  the  society  has  given  me 
trouble,  and  I do  not  know  whether  we  can 
talk  about  this  in  all  cases.  In  studying  the 
aboriginal  population  on  Cape  York  Penin- 
sula, I simply  could  not  find  a society.  I would 
have  to  describe  it  in  terms  of  an  ego-centered 
set  of  societies ; no  one  individual  was  the  center 
of  a system  of  networks  that  overlapped  iso- 
typically  with  anyone  else’s.  Not  only  were 
there  networks  and  chains,  but  these  were  also 
institutionally  divided.  A man  might  partici- 
pate in  a trade  network  or  chain  that  went 
southward;  whereas  his  ritual  networks  might 
go  northward,  and  with  no  overlap  between 
the  members  of  the  two  groups.  The  same 


160  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

would  be  true  for  symbolic  and  even  for  some 
technological  behaviors.  All  of  these,  inci- 
dentally, were  phrased  in  terms  of  kinship, 
which  gave  the  basis  for  moving  outward  from 
the  series  of  individuals  with  which  one  started. 

The  Application  of  Role  Theory 

These  problems  all  point  to  deficiencies  in  our 
descriptive  methods  and  the  resulting  content 
of  our  descriptions;  some  participants  have 
called  for  development  of  sociometric  tech- 
niques. Given  my  bias  toward  roles  as  useful 
descriptive  units,  and  since  we  have  to  look  at 
the  interaction  of  something,  I suggest  that  a 
further  elaboration  of  role  constructs  would 
allow  us  to  go  into  any  society — whether  highly 
structured,  like  the  Australian  societies,  or  less 
structured,  like  Eskimo  groups — and,  by  an 
inductive  process,  build  up  the  networks  of 
roles.  We  should  not  only  include  masculine 
roles,  feminine  roles,  children’s  roles,  totemic 
leaders’  roles,  etc. ; but  we  should  also  see  roles 
in  terms  of  behavioral  activity,  including 
ideational  and  emotional  aspects.  This  might 
help  us  get  really  comparative  information. 

The  roles  would  have  to  be  seen  in  spatial 
and  temporal,  as  well  as  in  social  contexts. 
There  are  diurnal  and  seasonal  patterns.  When 
a woman  is  out  with  her  children  and  with 
other  women  digging  yams  during  the  day- 
time, is  she  a wife,  or  is  the  role  of  wife  latent 
then?  What  are  the  possibilities  for  the  mani- 
festation and  latency  of  roles,  especially  of 
children  engaged  in  anticipatory  learning?  I 
think  that  the  role  approach  forces  us  to  look 
at  contexts — the  setting,  duration,  and  fre- 
quency of  behaviors.  We  would  find  that  a 
certain  woman  is  the  head  of  a matrifocal 
family  eight  or  twelve  hours  a day  and  head  of 
a nuclear  family  during  the  rest  of  the  time. 
Most  of  the  ethnographic  accounts  do  not  give 
us  that  kind  of  information.  If  we  break  up  the 
24-hour  day  and  365-day  year  in  terms  of  roles 
and  networks  of  roles,  we  will  come  up  with 
more  realistic  and  exact  descriptions  for  com- 
parative use.  This  would  allow  us  to  tackle  a 
number  of  the  problems  that  have  merely  been 
touched  upon  at  the  symposium — problems  of 
definition,  correlations,  criteria  of  nomadism 
(“nomadic  style”),  territoriality,  descent,  and 
devolution. 


The  Study  of  Ritual 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  main  gap  in  the 
material  presented  so  far — and  I suppose  that 
this  is  true  of  a great  deal  of  the  material 
being  collected  today — occurs  in  the  area  of 
symbolic  or  ritual  behavior.  I could  re- 
emphasize the  point  made  by  Dr.  Helm  that 
we  must  deal  with  rocio-territorial  groups.  This 
is  partly  a matter  of  having  enough  personnel 
in  the  field  to  be  in  about  eight  places  at  once 
and  enough  time  to  remain  through  several 
seasonal  cycles.  We  have  to  get  at  the  socio- 
symbolic  or  ritual  aspects  of  behavior,  the  idea 
categories  that  are  imposed  on  the  land  and  the 
people,  thus  linking  specific  people  with  speci- 
fic bits  of  land — as  in  the  totemic  complexes 
that  Dr.  Hiatt  mentioned.  So  far  as  I know,  the 
Eskimos  do  not  have  land  ideologies  and  rituals 
of  this  type,  but  one  wonders  if  this  may  be 
because  those  who  have  described  them  had 
too  narrow  a conception  of  symbolic  and  ritual 
behavior.  The  character  of  the  idea  system  is, 
of  course,  of  vital  importance  in  the  survival 
of  these  groups.  Given  a universal  rigid  kind  of 
system,  as  in  Australia,  a change  in  one  part 
of  the  system  is  likely  to  bring  about  change 
elsewhere,  notwithstanding  Dr.  Drucker’s 
recent  statement  about  the  Haida  (1965).  On 
the  other  hand,  one  gets  the  impression  that  the 
Alaskan  groups,  and  band  groups  in  general, 
have  a much  more  elastic  ideological  system. 
And,  as  Dr.  Deetz  pointed  out,  the  ideological 
elements  are  manageable  and  provide  a major 
means  of  adjustment  if  they  are  of  importance 
to  the  social  behavior  of  the  group.  Myth  can 
be  adjusted  to  reality,  and  to  a certain  extent 
reality  can  be  adjusted  to  myth. 

These  considerations  relate  to  a whole  series 
of  more  specific  problems.  I do  not  see,  for 
example,  how  one  can  claim  to  have  found 
corporate  structures  without  the  names  or  sym- 
bols of  corporateness  that  provide  for  stability 
and  maintenance.  (Only  “he  who  thinks  that 
he’ll  be  the  same  tomorrow  does  not  need  a 
name.”)  Names  furnish  ideas  about  land 
ownership  and  boundaries.  Apropos  of  this 
last,  I do  not  quite  understand  how  Dr.  Hiatt’s 
groups  can  have  named  plots  of  land  and  yet 
not  have  boundaries,  however  wide  or  vague. 
It  is  difficult  to  say  when  corporateness  is 
needed  by  a group.  What  conditions  would 


Discussions,  Part  III  1 6 1 


require  a group  to  take  on  corporate  character- 
istics, and  what  are  the  ideological  correlates 
of  such  corporate  structures? 

17L  Typology  and 

Reconstruction:  A Shoshoni  Example 
Speakers:  Eggan,  Hiatt 

Eggan:  I have  several  comments,  beginning 
with  some  brief  remarks,  on  typology.  Julian 
Steward  was  the  first  to  bring  some  typological 
order  out  of  the  chaos  of  band  organization 
(1936,  1955).  You  will  recall  that  he  set  up 
three  types,  partly  empirical  and  partly  ideal: 
the  patrilineal  band,  the  composite  band,  and 
the  matrilineal  band.  And  he  attempted  to  relate 
them  to  one  another  and  to  cultural  ecol- 
ogy. Elman  Service  more  recently  remodeled 
Steward’s  band  typology  (1962);  he  keeps 
Steward’s  two  main  types  but  sees  the  composite 
as  an  acculturative  product  of  the  patrilocal 
or  patrilineal  band,  and  he  adds  an  “anomalous 
band”  to  take  care  of  the  Shoshoni  and  Eskimo. 

I think  it  is  clear  that  our  sessions  have 
demonstrated  that  Service  is  going  in  the 
wrong  direction.  Bands  show  a much  greater 
variety  than  either  Steward  or  Service  allow. 
If  social  organization  is  adaptive,  then  this 
variety  is  exactly  what  we  would  expect.  We 
have  heard  about  a great  variety  of  bands  and 
will  probably  hear  of  more  in  the  future. 
However,  I think  there  will  prove  to  be  a 
limited  number  of  viable  combinations;  al- 
though this  is  still  to  be  determined. 

In  contradiction  to  Service,  I think  that 
patrilineal  bands  are  a specialization  on  the 
more  flexible,  amorphous  base  than  most  of 
us  have  been  describing.  That  is,  I do  not  think 
that  it  is  some  sort  of  primary  unit  that  has 
degenerated  in  late  times. 

Another  aspect  of  this  problem  has  been 
raised  a number  of  times  for  North  America 
and  other  areas.  There  is  seasonal  alternation 
between  regional  or  rriacrobands  and  local  or 
microbands,  and  we  need  to  sort  these  out 
systematically.  This  offers  us  an  opportunity  to 
do  better  comparative  work  than  we  normally 
have  done,  since,  after  all,  one  has  the  same 
people  under  different  ecological  or  seasonal 
differences  rearranging  themselves  in  different 


groupings.  We  should  have  some  closer  control 
on  such  situations,  so  that  we  can  specify  more 
clearly  the  factors  operative  in  them. 

I would  like  to  make  some  remarks  on  the 
Shoshoni  of  the  Great  Basin,  since  they  have 
been  mentioned  by  several  people  and  might 
cast  a little  more  light  on  what  has  happened 
in  Australia.  I might  say  that  the  Shoshoni,  in 
relation  to  their  neighbors  to  the  north  and 
south,  are  in  a peaceful  situation  like  that  des- 
cribed by  Dr.  Turnbull.  This  is  true  both 
within  linguistic  groups  and,  for  the  most  part, 
across  the  linguistic  boundaries,  as  well.  The 
Shoshoni  and  their  linguistic  neighbors,  the 
Ute  and  the  Northern  and  Southern  Paiute, 
throw  some  light  on  the  development  of  band 
organization  under  extreme  ecological  con- 
ditions. This  is  an  area  of  long  occupation  by 
what  archeologists  call  the  Desert  Culture,  a 
combination  of  hunting  of  small  game  on  the 
part  of  men  and  gathering  by  women.  This  has 
gone  on  since  at  least  8,000  b.c.,  perhaps  even 
earlier.  There  has  been  a nearly  continuous 
cultural  record;  even  though  there  is  evidence 
of  movements  into  and  out  of  the  area. 

The  Great  Basin  area  itself  is  quite  different 
from  most  other  culture  areas.  It  is  dish-shaped 
with  a culture  of  bare  essentials  in  the  center 
and  a series  of  specializations  at  the  margins, 
including  incipient  agriculture  or  use  of  the 
horse,  according  to  the  opportunities  offered  by 
the  local  habitat.  Basic  social  structure  is 
essentially  a loose  network  of  ties  based  on  kin- 
ship and  marriage.  It  is  completely  bilateral 
and  runs  across  linguistic  boundaries,  and  it 
functions  both  to  supply  spouses  and  to  spread 
information  about  the  sporadic  appearance  of 
new  food  supplies. 

The  winter  group  was  made  up  of  two  to  five 
families  or  ten  to  twenty  people,  who  were 
almost  invariably  kin.  There  might  be  a differ- 
ent kin  composition  from  one  year  to  the  next, 
but  the  size  of  the  group  was  fairly  stable.  The 
basic  ties  were  sibling  bonds,  parent-child 
bonds,  and  marriage  ties.  Residence  through- 
out the  area  was  generally  matrilocal,  at  least 
initially.  Brother-sister  exchange  was  universal 
and  was  accompanied  by  polygyny  (usually 
sororal)  and  fraternal  polyandry  (sometimes 
temporary,  sometimes  institutionalized). 
Brother-sister  exchange  gave  double  bonds  or 
“knots”  at  certain  places  in  the  network. 


1 62  Social  and  Territorial  Organization 

In  a few  central  regions  along  the  Humboldt 
River,  one  found  a more  stable  food  supply, 
which  made  it  possible  for  groups  of  two  to  five 
families  to  remain  in  the  same  place  year  after 
year.  In  summer,  they  made  a circular  trip  of 
25  to  150  miles,  each  group  stopping  at  a series 
of  places  known  to  them.  In  these  localities  it 
was  possible  for  parents  and  children  to  remain 
together  for  more  than  one  generation,  and  in 
the  second  generation  the  normal  process  of 
brother-sister  exchange  made  for  the  insti- 
tutionalization of  cross-cousin  marriage.  This 
trend  was  strong  enough  to  affect  the  kinship 
system,  resulting  in  a Dakota  pattern  for  the 
terminology  and  a joking  and  permissive  re- 
lation between  cross-cousins.  This  marriage 
was  thought  to  be  of  value,  since  children 
reared  there  learned  the  area  thoroughly. 

In  areas  to  the  north  and  east,  there  were 
areas  of  rather  more  stable  food  supplies. 
Salmon  came  up  the  Snake  River,  and  the 
introduction  of  the  horse  made  possible  larger 
groupings.  Interestingly  enough,  cross-cousin 
marriage  here  gave  way  to  what  Steward  calls 
“pseudo-cross-cousin”  marriage,  where  one 
marries  a step-cross-cousin,  a sociological 
cross-cousin,  rather  than  a real  one.  This  makes 
possible  integration  on  a broader  scale  and 
allows  for,  say,  the  assimiliation  of  a mother 
with  a daughter  coming  into  a band.  This  dates 
back  before  1700,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that 
the  Comanche  had  pseudo-cross-cousin  mar- 
riage too. 

Now,  around  the  margins  of  this  area  there 
is  another  set  of  specializations.  In  the  Owens 
Valley,  where  seed  resources  and  other  re- 
sources were  more  abundant,  the  density  was 
increased  from  one  person  per  twenty  square 
miles  to  one  person  per  two  square  miles.  And 
due  to  the  matrilocal  residence  of  the  women 


concerned  with  seed-gathering,  there  was  a 
development  of  matrilocal  bands  which — as 
Steward  says  somewhere — are  almost,  but  not 
quite  matrilineal  clans,  as  he  defined  them. 

Toward  the  south,  the  Southern  Paiute,  with 
incipient  agriculture,  also  had  relatively  large 
bands.  And  I predict  that  when  we  get  the 
archeological  sequences  worked  out  for  proto- 
Hopi  and  the  Tusayan  Area,  we  will  find  that 
in  Basketmaker  I there  is  a transition  from  the 
Basin-type  Desert  culture  to  incipient  matri- 
local bands  and,  probably,  matrilineal  clans 
in  association  with  agriculture. 

I happen  to  have  grown  up,  anthropologi- 
cally, on  Australia.  And  I am  somewhat  sur- 
prised to  find  that  many  of  the  same  straw 
men  are  being  demolished,  and  in  some  cases 
by  slightly  dubious  statistics.  I am  also  sur- 
prised at  the  cavalier  dismissal  of  the  work  of 
earlier  scholars.  Given  the  state  of  knowledge 
of  Australian  social  organization  in  1930,  it 
seems  to  me  that  Radcliffe-Brown’s  contri- 
bution was  a very  considerable  one.  It  was  too 
narrow  and  did  not  take  into  account  the 
systems  of  Arnhem  Land,  nor  did  it  treat 
technology  and  religion.  But  it  seems  to  me  a 
base  upon  which  to  build  and  elaborate,  rather 
than  something  to  be  destroyed. 

Hiatt:  To  reply  to  Dr.  Eggan’s  comment 
about  our  knocking  down  Radcliffe-Brown’s 
straw  men,  which  is  very  nearly  what  Stanner 
says,  I want  to  say  for  the  record  that  the 
horde  and  the  subsections  are,  at  the  very  least, 
very  sturdy  straw  men.'  I make  no  quarrel 
with  the  fact  that  Radcliffe-Brown  was  a 
worthy  pioneer  in  aboriginal  studies,  but  this 
does  not  mean  that  one  should  not  take  issue 
with  him  on  particular  points. 

Eggan:  Just  for  the  record,  I was  referring 
to  the  last  paragraph  in  Dr.  Meggitt’s  paper. 


Part  IV 

Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements 


L.  R.- HIATT 


Levi-Strauss,  whose  distinguished  contribution 
to  anthropology  we  honor  at  this  conference, 
has  paid  a good  deal  of  attention  to  the 
Australian  aborigines.  In  this  paper  I shall 
discuss  some  of  his  views  by  relating  them  to 
the  Gidjingali  tribe  of  northern  Arnhem 
Land.' 

“Gidjingali”  is  the  term  for  the  language 
spoken  by  people  who,  until  recently,  lived 
south  of  Cape  Stewart  and  around  the  mouth 
of  the  Blyth  River.  When  I carried  out  my 
field  work  between  1958  and  i960,  most  of 
them  were  living  about  thirty  miles  from  their 
homelands  at  Maningrida,  a government 
settlement  established  in  1957  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Liverpool  River.  Elsewhere  in  this  volume 
I have  described  some  aspects  of  their  tradi- 
tional local  organization.1 2 3 4 

People  of  northeastern  Arnhem  Land  re- 
ferred to  the  Gidjingali  as  the  “Burera,”  whom 
Warner  (1937,  pp.  15,  36)  included  as  one  of 
the  eight  tribes  he  designated  collectively  as  the 

1.  I have  made  substantial  alterations  in  this  paper 
since  presenting  it  at  Man  the  Hunter  Symposium  in 
Chicago. 

2.  Chapter  io,  “Ownership  and  Use  of  Land  Among 
the  Australian  Aborigines.” 

3.  I shall  use  the  following  abbreviations : B = brother ; 
D = daughter;  F — father;  M — mother;  S = son; 
Z = sister. 

4.  For  main  characteristics  of  Aranda-type  systems, 
see  Elkin  (1964,  pp.  99-103). 


“Murngin.”  Although  he  admitted  that  they 
had  a very  different  language  from  the  rest 
and  were  affiliated  linguistically  with  tribes 
further  to  the  west  (p.  37),  he  apparently, 
believed  that  they  shared  with  other  of  his 
“Murngin”  tribes  a kinship  system  based  on 
matrilateral  cross-cousin  marriage.  This  was 
not  so.  The  Gidjingali  had  an  Aranda-type 
kinship  system  which  was  based  on  marriage 
between  certain  kinds  of  second  cousins  (e.g., 
MFZDS-MMBDD).3  A total  of  four  categories 
of  male  relatives  were  distinguished  in  Ego’s 
grandparental  generation. 4 

Levi-Strauss  (1949,  1963  [1958])  attaches 
fundamental  importance  to  mechanisms  of 
reciprocity.  He  believes  that  marriage  regula- 
tions and  kinship  systems  can  best  be  under- 
stood by  regarding  them  as  “a  kind  of 
language,  a set  of  processes  permitting  the 
establishment,  between  individuals  and  groups, 
of  a certain  type  of  communication”  (1963, 
p.  61).  The  mediating  factors  in  this  case  are 
not  words  but  women,  who  are  circulated 
between  clans,  lineages,  or  families. 

Gidjingali  kinship  terminology  and  marriage 
rules  can  be  adequately  described  within  the 
limits  of  a hypothetical  system  of  exchange- 
marriage  among  four  patricians.  The  model 
bears  little  relation  to  marriage  arrangements 
in  contemporary  practice,  and  so  I shall  use 
the  method  of  conjectural  history  in  presenting 
it.  I shall  leave  till  later  the  question  whether 


1 66  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

it  has  any  explanatory,  as  distinct  from  ex- 
pository, value  and,  in  particular,  whether 
there  is  any  evidence  for  supposing  it  to  repre- 
sent a communication  system  that  uses  women 
as  units. 

The  Model 

Suppose  that  on  some  past  occasion  on  abori- 
ginal law-maker  named  Plato5  proclaimed  the 
following  constitution : 

Section  i ; Kinship  groups  and  terminology 

a)  Descendants  in  the  male  line  of  four  men  in 
Plato’s  grandparental  generation — his  FF, 
MF,  FMB,  and  MMB — henceforth  belong  to 
four  separate  clans,  named  p,  q,  r,  and  s 

(Fig-  i). 

b)  A person  should  apply  a different  kinship 
term  to  his  FF,  MF,  FMB,  and  MMB;  and  to 
their  respective  sisters,  sons,  and  daughters 
(Fig.  2). 

c)  Everyone  should  abide  by  the  principle 
of  the  equivalence  of  siblings  of  the  same  sex. 
For  example,  a man  should  apply  the  same 
term  to  both  his  F and  FB;  another  term  to 
both  his  M and  MZ. 

d)  Everyone  should  abide  by  the  principle 
of  the  combination  of  alternate  generations. 
For  example,  within  his  own  clan  a man  should 
apply  the  terms  “FF”  or  “FFZ”  to  all  mem- 
bers of  his  FF’s  genealogical  generation  and 
generations  alternating  with  it;  and  the  terms 
“F”  or  “FZ”  to  all  members  of  other  genera- 
tions. The  same  principle  should  be  applied 
to  the  other  three  clans,  giving  a total  of  sixteen 
terms  as  indicated  in  Figure  2. 

5.  In  the  original  version  of  this  paper,  I called  the 
imaginary  law-maker  “Moses.”  L^vi-Strauss,  in  the 
course  of  his  speech  accepting  the  Viking  Fund  Medal 
and  Award,  spoke  of  the  possible  past  existence  of  an 
aboriginal  Socrates  with  mental  powers  capable  of 
formulating  the  kind  of  model  I had  presented  earlier  in 
the  conference.  He  did  not  say  what  he  had  against  my 
choice  of  Moses,  but  I agree  that  on  the  evidence  avail- 
able Socrates  would  seem  to  have  had  the  higher  I.Q. 
L^vi-Strauss  might  also  tend  to  favor  a mind  capable  of 
conceiving  perfect  Forms  and  imperfect  Particulars.  Yet 
Socrates  was  a social  critic  rather  than  a law-maker,  and 
so,  as  a compromise,  I have  substituted  Plato  for  Moses. 
(Plato’s  later  dialogues,  including  The  Laws,  present  his 
own  rather  than  Socrates’  views.) 


Section  2 : Marriage  rules 

a)  Men  should  not  marry  within  their  own 
clans. 

b)  The  right  to  dispose  of  a girl  in  marriage 
is  vested  equally  in  her  M and  MB.  She  may 
be  bestowed  an  infant  but  should  not  live  with 
her  husband  till  puberty. 

c)  Men  should  abide  by  the  principle  of 
niece-exchange.  That  is,  when  a man  receives 
a woman  in  marriage,  he  should  subsequently 
bestow  his  own  ZD  on  his  WMB. 

d)  Sons  should  follow  in  the  same  tradition 
of  exchange  as  their  fathers.  Thus,  as  Plato’s 
MMB  gave  a niece  to  Plato’s  F (Fig.  1),  so 
Plato’s  MMBS  should  give  a niece  to  Plato; 
and  Plato’s  F and  Plato  should  in  return  give 
nieces  to  their  respective  WMBs.  Figure  3 
illustrates  the  results  of  such  exchanges.  Arthur 
and  Jack  have  exchanged  their  nieces,  Jill  and 
Ada.  Jack  has  married  his  MMBDD,  Arthur 
his  FZDDD.  Arthur’s  DD,  Laura,  is  related  to 
Jack’s  son,  Simon,  as  both  MMBDD  and 
FZDD.  By  extending  the  diagram  further  it 
can  be  shown  that  all  niece-exchanges  between 
the  patrilineal  descendants  of  Arthur  and  Jack 
ad  infinitum  result  in  marriages  to  women  re- 
lated to  their  husbands  as  both  MMBDD  and 
FZDDD. 

e)  The  rule  that  sons  should  follow  in  the 
same  tradition  of  niece-exchange  as  their 
fathers  should  be  interpreted  broadly  in  terms 
of  clan  affiliation,  not  solely  in  terms  of  actual 
F-S  connections.  Thus,  clans  p and  s should 
exchange  nieces;  and,  likewise,  clans  q and  r 
should  exchange  nieces. 

f)  It  follows  from  the  two  previous  rules  that 
a man  has  rights  to  the  daughters  not  only  of 
his  true  MMBD  but  also  of  all  the  other 
women  in  her  patrician  classified  as  her  sister; 
conversely,  he  has  rights  to  the  daughters 
not  only  of  his  true  FZDD  but  also  of  all  the 
other  women  whose  MMs  belong  to  his  own 
clan. 

g)  The  oldest  of  a group  of  men  sharing 
rights  to  women  as  defined  in  the  previous 
clause  has  priority,  the  second  oldest  second 
priority,  and  so  on.  Polygyny  is  permitted,  but 
an  older  man  should  not  take  additional  wives 
by  insisting  on  his  prior  right  if  to  do  so  means 
subjecting  a younger  unmarried  man  to 
unreasonable  hardship. 


Hiatt  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements  167 


A 


PLATO 

Figure  i. 


Ego’s  Patriclon  M’s  Patrician  Wfc  Patrician  WM’s  Patrician 


Figure  2. 


1 68  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


Arthur 


Ada 


La  ura 

Figure  3. 

h)  No  one  should  marry  a person  who  is  centage  of  men  managed  to  marry  women  to 
not  a member  of  p,  q,  r,  or  s.  If  all  the  prin-  whom  they  had  rights.  In  this  section  I shall 
ciples  set  out  in  this  and  the  previous  section  try  to  explain  why. 

of  the  constitution  are  obeyed,  a closed  system  In  i960  the  Gidjingali  numbered  about  300. 
of  niece-exchange  will  be  set  in  motion  along  They  were  divided  into  four  communites  and 
the  lines  indicated  in  Figure  4.  28  patricians  (mean  10.6,  range  2 to  29). 

Marriages  occurred  both  within  and  between 
communities,  and,  indeed,  between  Gidjingali 
The  Facts  and  members  of  neighboring  tribes.  A person 

applied  one  of  the  four  sets  of  kinship  terms 
If  Gidjingali  marriages  once  conformed  to  the  (Fig.  2)  to  members  of  every  patrician  he 
principles  of  this  system,  they  were  no  longer  encountered. 

doing  so  when  I arrived  in  1958.  The  basic  I shall  limit  my  analysis  to  the  Anbara  corn- 
kinship  terms  and  the  definition  of  marriage  munity,  which  contained  a total  of  48  adult 
rights  were  as  described.  But  there  was  no  rule  males  and  47  adult  females  (by  “adult”  I mean 
stating  that  marriages  should  occur  within  over  the  age  of  about  14).  I shall  use  the  ex- 
closed  systems  of  four  patricians.  In  fact  they  pressions  MMBDD  and  FZDDD  to  mean  the 
did  not.  More  important,  only  a small  per-  women  to  whom  Ego  had  marriage  rights,  not 


just  his  true  MMBDD  and  FZDDD  (see  Fig. 

5)- 

At  the  time  of  observation  25  men  were 
without  wives  (56  per  cent  were  under  25 
years  of  age).  The  remaining  23  men  (prac- 
tically all  of  them  aged  over  25)  were  married 
to  a total  of  35  wives,  only  six  of  whom  were 


Hiatt  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements  169 

related  to  their  husbands  as  MMBDD  or 
FZDDD.  Two  questions  arise:  (1)  why  were 
there  so  few  unions  consistent  with  the  exercise 
of  marriage  rights  (only  1 7 per  cent)  ? and 
(b)  how  did  the  other  unions  come  about  ? The 
answers  are  relevant  to  a general  question 
raised  by  Firth  (1954,  p.  12)  when  he  asked 


Females  in 
generations 
2,4,6, 

M , et  c . 


Males 

in  generations 
2,4,  6, 
MB,  etc. 


Males  in 
generations 
1.3,5, 
MF,  etc. 


Females  in 
generations 
1,3,5, 
MFZ.etc. 


Males  in 

generations 

2.4,6. 

F,  etc. 

Females  in 
generations 
2,4,6, 
FZ,  etc. 

Females  in 
generations 
1,3,5, 

Z,  etc. 

Males  in 
generations 
1,3.5, 

B,  etc. 

Females  in 
generations 
I 3 5 

MMBDD, etc. 


Males  in 
generations 
1,3,5, 
MMBDS  eta 


Males  in 
generations 
2 4 6 
FMBS.etc. 


Females  in 
generations 
2,4,  6, 
FMBD  etc. 


Males  in 
generations 
1,3,5, 
MMB,  etc, 

Females  in 
generations 
1.3,5, 
MM,  etc. 

Females  in 
generations 
2,4,6, 
MMBD.etc. 

Males  in 
generations 
2,4,6, 
MMBS.etc. 

Arrows  indicate  niece  exchange.  Thus  men  of  generations  2,4,6  in  P 
and  Q marry  each  other’s  sisters,  receiving  them  from  bestowers 
in  generations  1,3,5  in  S and  R respectively 

Figure  4. 


70  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


MMB 

MM 

1 

MMBS 

MMBD 

8 

1 

M 


A 


(i) 


(i)  Ego  had  rights  to  ths  daughter*  of  hit  MMBD  and  all  other  females  in  her  patrician 
classified  os  her  sister. 


(ii)  Ego  also  had  rights  to  the  daughters  of  any  other  woman  classified  with  his  MMBD  whose  MM 
belonged  to  his  own  patrician. 

Figure  5. 


what  happened  in  Australian  systems  when 
individuals  lacked  relatives  of  the  kind  they 
were  expected  to  marry. 

Examination  of  genealogical  and  age  data 
disclosed  that,  when  18  of  the  35  women 
married,  adult  males  with  rights  to  them  were 
nonexistent.  That  is,  in  order  to  marry  upon 
reaching  puberty,  these  18  women  had  to  wed 
men  without  rights  to  them.  A similar  analysis 
showed  that  19  of  the  48  Anbara  men  did  not 
have  a MMBDD  or  FZDDD  of  marriageable 
age.  The  remaining  29  had  a total  of  27 
mature  relatives  of  these  kinds,  but  the  distri- 
bution of  relationships  was  such  that  only  2 1 
male-female  pairs  could  be  formed.  In  short, 
at  the  time  of  observation  demographic  factors 
alone  limited  the  number  of  men  married  to  a 
MMBDD  or  FZDDD  to  a possible  44  per  cent. 

Now  in  cases  where  there  was  no  one  with  a 
right  to  a particular  female  child,  it  was 
accepted  that  her  M and  MB  could  without 
delay  choose  a man  with  no  right  to  her.  The 
only  formal  requirement  was  that  he  should 
belong  to  the  same  terminological  category  as 
would  a man  with  a right  (that  is,  the  girl 


should  be  his  classificatory  MMBDD) ; or, 
alternatively,  he  should  be  an  actual  or 
classificatory  cross-cousin  of  the  girl.  The  ad- 
vantage to  bestowers  in  making  an  early 
promise  to  a mature  male  was  that  they  could 
from  that  moment  expect  him  regularly  to 
send  them  presents,  support  them  in  quarrels, 
and  eventually  give  a niece  to  his  WMB. 

Sometimes  men  with  no  rights  to  any  women 
acquired  as  wives  females  to  whom  no  other 
men  had  rights.  Sometimes  men  with  rights 
waived  them  in  a display  of  generosity  in  favor 
of  men  without  rights.  But  sometimes  interests 
clashed  and  fights  broke  out.  It  is  impossible 
in  this  short  paper  to  analyze  these  conflicts 
(which  occurred  more  frequently  than  any 
other  type),  or  even  to  outline  the  oppor- 
tunism with  which  bestowers  and  seekers  of 
wives  tried  to  advance  their  own  interests.  I 
must  simplw  assert  that,  in  a context  in  which 
there  was  a chronic  disproportion  between  the 
demand  for  wives  and  the  supply  of  female 
relatives  specified  by  the  rule  defining  marriage 
rights,  the  rule  was  often  ignored.  These 
breaches,  in  combination  with  demographic 


Hiatt  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements 


factors  already  described,  helped  to  reduce  the 
percentage  of  men  married  to  a MMBDD  or 
FZDDD  even  further.  I did  not  observe  any- 
thing remotely  approaching  a closed  system  of 
exchange-marriage  among  four  patricians  of 
the  type  postulated  in  Figure  4. 6 

Models,  Facts,  and  Feeling  Cheated 

It  is  not  clear  from  Levi-Strauss’  writings 
whether  he  would  regard  these  facts  as  of  any 
significance  for  his  theory  on  kinship  and 
marriage.  He  stated  in  his  inaugural  lecture  at 
the  College  de  France  in  i960:  “In  admitting 
the  symbolic  nature  of  its  object,  social  anthro- 
pology does  not  thus  intend  to  cut  itself  off 
from  realia.  . . . One  cannot  study  , . . social 
rules  independently  of  the  things  which  corres- 
pond to  them”  (1966,  p.  115).  Although  the 
word  “correspond”  might  be  interpreted 
narrowly  to  mean  only  behavior  that  conforms 
with  the  rules,  the  context  suggests  that  he  was 
referring  to  the  relationship  between  rules  and 
what  actually  happens.  In  the  same  year, 
however,  he  described  Maybury-Lewis  as  a 
“prisoner  of  the  naturalistic  misconceptions 
which  have  so  long  pervaded  the  British 
school,”  because  “when  he  is  presented  a 
structural  model  which  departs  from  empirical 
reality,  he  feels  cheated  in  some  devious  way” 
(i960,  p.  52).  The  two  statements  are  not 
contradictory,  but  they  leave  us  wondering  how 
much  trust  Levi-Strauss  is  seeking.  After  sug- 
gesting that  the  different  aspects  of  social  life 
may  constitute  phenomena  whose  inmost 
nature  is  the  same  as  that  of  language,  he 
raised  the  question:  “How  can  this  hypothesis 
be  verified?”  (1963,  p.  62).  Before  being  led 
into  the  non-empirical  wilderness,  we  might 
also  like  to  know  how  it  can  be  falsified.  Or  if 
the  theory  is  merely  a heuristic  model,  in 
which  case  normal  criteria  of  falsifiability 
might  properly  be  regarded  as  inappropriate, 
we  might  still  reasonably  ask  how  we  are  to  tell 
whether  or  not  we  are  being  misguided. 

6.  For  a fuller  account,  see  Hiatt,  1965. 

7.  Here  is  an  appropriate  place  to  say  that  I com- 
pleted this  paper  before  reading  Sahlins’  review  (1966) 
of  Structural  Anthropology.  I shall  have  the  dubious  distinc- 
tion of  being  among  the  first  to  fulfill  his  prophecies. 

8.  See  Jones,  1925;  Malinowski,  i960. 


171 

It  is  at  least  of  passing  interest  to  note  that 
Levi-Strauss’  theoretical  approach  to  social 
phenomena  bears  some  striking  resemblances 
to  that  of  Freud. ' First,  both  writers  treat  social 
institutions  as  manifestations  in  some  degree  of 
certain  unconscious  properties  of  the  human 
mind.  Levi-Strauss  has  written:  “The  road  will 
then  be  open  for  a comparative  structural 
analysis  of  customs,  institutions,  and  accepted 
patterns  of  behavior  . . . the  so-called  ‘collec- 
tive unconscious’  would,  in  the  final  analysis, 
be  no  more  than  the  expression,  on  the  level  of 
individual  thought  and  behaviour,  of  certain 
time  and  space  modalities  of  the  universal  laws 
which  make  up  the  unconscious  activity  of  the 
mind”  (1963,  p.  65).  The  difference  is  that  the 
unconscious  processes  postulated  by  Freud  are 
conative  and  affective,  whereas  those  postu- 
lated by  Levi-Strauss  are  cognitive. 

Second,  in  dealing  with  empirical  material 
both  Levi-Strauss  and  Freud  distinguish  be- 
tween manifest  and  latent  content.  Levi- 
Strauss  has  argued  that  “a  theoretical  hypo- 
thesis which  deviates  from  the  manifest 
content  of  the  ethnographical  data  is  substan- 
tially upheld,  if  we  are  able  to  discover,  in 
the  latent  content  supplied  by  the  myths,  the 
religious  representations,  etc.,  some  data 
showing  a remarkable  parallelism  between 
the  native  categories,  and  those  arrived  at  by 
the  way  of  theoretical  reconstruction”  (i960, 
p.  50).  To  grant  such  conditions  is  (as  well- 
known  from  the  psychoanalytic  debate)  at 
least  to  give  verification  the  inside-running; 
and  when  special  hypothesis-saving  devices 
are  introduced  as  well  (such  as  those  used  by 
Ernest  Jones  with  the  Trobriand  material),8 
falsification  is  left  hobbled  at  the  starting-gate. 
Levi-Strauss  has  not,  as  far  as  I know,  resorted 
to  psychoanalytic  devices  when  informants  have 
failed  to  give  the  required  answers.  Instead,  he 
has  postulated  an  interference  with  their  cog- 
nitive processes.  In  his  reply  to  Maybury-Lewis, 
he  explained  a discrepancy  between  the 
structural  model  and  ethnographic  reality  by 
asserting  that  the  natives  had  “let  themselves  be 
mystified  by  their  own  system”  (i960,  p.  51). 

I shall  try  to  anticipate  how  Levi-Strauss 
might  deal  with  the  assertion  that,  among 
contemporary  Gidjingali,  women  did  not 
circulate  between  groups  in  systems  of  mar- 
riage-exchanges. One  possibility  would  be  to 


172  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

argue  that  this  fact  in  itself  does  not  disprove 
the  hypothesis  that  the  kinship  terminology  and 
marriage  rules  constituted  an  apparatus  ori- 
ginally set  up  for  the  purposes  of  communica- 
tion and  used  as  such.  It  merely  indicates  that 
the  apparatus  had  fallen  into  disuse.  In  1958 
fio  the  lines  of  communication  were  still  there 
as  an  integral  part  of  the  kinship  system,  but, 
for  demographic  and  other  reasons,  messages 
were  no  longer  being  sent. 

The  hypothesis  would  thus  be  saved  by 
making  it  refer  to  an  unobserved  state  of 
affairs  in  the  past.  In  that  case  my  presentation 
of  the  model  in  Figure  4 as  an  imaginary 
historical  event  might  have  been  apt,  though 
whether  Levi-Strauss  would  accept  such  a 
concrete  account  is  another  matter  (but  see 
note  5).  That  he  is  prepared  in  principle  to 
use  the  method  of  conjectural  history  is  indi- 
cated clearly  by  his  statement:  “One  may  well 
ask  oneself,  then,  if  Radcliffe-Brown’s  mistrust 
of  historical  reconstruction  did  not  correspond 
to  a stage  of  scientific  development  which  will 
soon  have  passed”  (1966,  p.  115).  This  allows 
us  to  add  yet  another  similarity  between 
Levi-Strauss  and  Freud. 

Another  defense  of  the  theory  might  be  to 
say  that  the  postulated  communication  appara- 
tus is  a latent  or  unrealized  aspect  of  the  kinship 
system,  created  and  perpetuated  by  un- 
conscious mental  structures  present  in  all 
Gidjingali,  but  prevented  from  functioning  by 
demographic  and  other  factors.  In  this  view 
there  would  be  no  critical  difference  between 
past  states  and  present,  and  hence  no  need 
to  postulate  a conception  once  perfectly 
realized  but  now  barely  acknowledged.  To  put 
this  another  way,  the  first  version  of  the  theory 
would  represent  contemporary  Gidjingali  kin- 
ship terminology  and  marriage  rules  as 
“survivals”  from  a past  period  when  the 
“true”  meaning  or  purpose  of  the  system  was 
realized  in  actual  behavior  (see  “The  Concept 
of  Archaism  in  Anthropology,”  Levi-Strauss, 
1963,  p.  1 1 7).  The  second  version  would 
postulate  the  “true”  meaning  or  purpose  of 
the  system  as  a chronically  unrealized  un- 
conscious ideal. 

Explanations  of  the  observed  in  terms  of  the 
unobserved  are  notoriously  susceptible  to 
charges  of  circularity  (e.g.,  “There  is  a present 
in  my  stocking  because  Santa  Claus  came  last 


night;  Santa  Claus  exists  because  there  is  a 
present  in  my  stocking”).  We  could  not  place 
much  faith  in  an  explanation  of  Australian 
kinship  systems  in  which  the  effect  is  the  only 
evidence  for  the  occurrence  of  the  alleged 
cause.  The  absence  of  independent  evidence 
has  always  been  the  difficulty  for  conjectural 
history,  and  (as  far  as  the  evolution  of  kinship 
systems  is  concerned)  I fail  to  see  how  such 
evidence  might  be  provided  by  “stratigraphic 
excavations,  the  introduction  of  statistics  into 
archaeology,  the  analysis  of  pollens,  and  the 
use  of  carbon- 14,  and  above  all  the  closer  and 
closer  collaboration  between  ethnologists  and 
sociologists,  on  the  one  hand  and  archaeolo- 
gists and  prehistorians,  on  the  other”  (Levi- 
Strauss,  1966,  p.  1 15). 

Levi-Strauss  has  provided  more  substantial 
instructions  for  discovering  independent  evi- 
dence of  unconscious  causal  factors  by  directing 
us  to  myth,  ritual,  and  religious  symbolism 
( 1960,  pp.  50,  53).  I did  not  detect  such  materi- 
al during  my  investigations,  but  perhaps  I 
was  not  looking  for  it.  The  only  data  that 
appear  to  support  Levi-Strauss’  theory  were 
undisguised. 

First,  the  people  had  in  relation  to  marriage 
arrangements  a definite  notion  of  reciprocity 
between  individuals:  namely,  that  if  X gives  a 
niece  to  Y,  then  Y should  subsequently  give  a 
niece  to  X (Fig.  3).  Second,  marriage  rights 
were  defined  partly  in  terms  of  clan  member- 
ship (Fig.  5).  Third,  occasionally  men  spoke  of 
traditional  exchange  relationships  between 
clans.  Do  these  three  facts  indicate  that  at  least 
some  Gidjingali  consciously  harbored  an  ideal 
image  of  marriage  arrangements  of  the  sort 
represented  in  Figure  4? 

A full  discussion  of  the  question  would  re- 
quire an  analysis  of  the  corporate  functions 
of  Gidjingali  patricians.  Elsewhere  I have 
argued  that  they  were  neither  local  nor 
political  units  and  that  their  main  functions 
were  ritual  (Hiatt,  1965).  But  here  I shall  con- 
fine myself  to  marriage. 

The  Gidjingali  were  polygynous,  and  the 
ratio  of  men  to  women  was  about  equal.  This 
meant  that  the  demand  for  wives  always  ex- 
ceeded the  supply.  Bachelors  worried  about 
their  chances  of  acquiring  spouses,  married 
men  of  losing  them.  Men  and  women  with  girls 
to  dispose  in  marriage  used  them  to  further 


their  own  interests.  In  this  context,  the  system 
of  kinship  and  marriage  to  some  extent  regu- 
lated the  distribution  of  scarce  resources. 
Marriage  rights  stated  in  terms  of  specific 
genealogical  links  (Fig.  5)  located  for  a man  a 
few  women  to  whose  daughters  he  could  make 
strong  claims.  Only  17  per  cent  6f  unions  in 
the  sample  I discussed  under  the  heading  “The 
Facts”  were  consistent  with  the  exercise  of  such 
rights.  But,  as  well  as  narrow  rules  defining 
marriage  rights,  there  were  also  broad  rules 
stated  in  terms  of  kin  categories.  These  located 
for  a man  a much  larger  number  of  women 
(all  those  classified  with  his  MMBDD  and 
with  his  FZD)  with  whom  marriage  would  be 
morally  proper  (or  “straight,”  as  it  has  often 
been  expressed).  His  difficulty  here  was  that 
other  men  had  genealogically  defined  rights 
to  many  of  these  women,  and  he  was  accord- 
ingly at  a jural  disadvantage. 

Because  some  confusion  has  arisen  from  a 
failure  to  distinguish  between  genealogically 
defined  marriage  rights  and  moral  attitudes 
to  marriages  stated  in  terms  of  kin  categories, 
I shall  restate  the  position  in  a different  way. 
If  a man  acquired  as  a wife  (e.g.,  by  elope- 
ment) a women  belonging  to  one  of  the 
following  six  categories — Z,  FZ,  M,  MM, 
MMBD,  FMBD — the  marriage  was  regarded 
as  immoral,  whether  or  not  the  husband  had 
in  the  process  infringed  the  genealogically 
defined  right  of  another  man.  If  he  married  a 
woman  belonging  to  one  of  the  remaining  two 
categories — MMBDD,  FZD — the  marriage 
was  regarded  as  morally  proper,  again  whether 
or  not  he  had  infringed  the  marriage  right  of 
another  man.  About  90  per  cent  of  Gidjingali 
marriages  were  “straight”  in  this  sense. 
Occasionally,  as  a result  of  previous  irregular- 
ities, a man  had  a genealogically  defined  right 
to  a woman  who  belonged  to  a category  of 
female  relatives  with  whom  marriage  was  im- 
moral. If  he  married  her,  people  said  that, 
strictly  speaking,  the  union  was  improper, 
but  they  admitted  that  the  situation  was  a 
mix-up. 

Given  the  struggle  for  wives,  it  is  not  surpris- 
ing that  bestowers  tended  to  be  hardheaded. 
Sometimes  they  bestowed  nieces  in  response 
to  a legitimate  claim,  sometimes  in  defiance  of 
it;  but  usually  they  aimed  at  placing  the 
recipient  under  an  obligation.  In  these  circum- 


Hiatt  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements  173 

stances  niece-exchange  appeared  as  a contrac- 
tual arrangement  between  individuals  rather 
*han  a symbolic  transaction  between  groups. 

I said  that  marriage  rights  were  defined 
partly  in  terms  of  clan  membership.  This 
meant  that  a man  might  regard  all  women  of 
a specified  category  within  a specified  patrician 
as  his  potential  mothers-in-law  and  that  he 
might  legitimately  make  a claim  on  any  one 
of  them.  It  did  not  mean  that  the  clan  as  a 
whole  had  a joint  responsibility  to  provide  him 
with  a wife,  and  I never  saw  clansmen  speak 
or  act  in  these  terms.  I also  said  that  , occa- 
sionally men  spoke  of  traditional  exchange 
relationships  between  two  patricians  (though 
never  four,  as  in  the  system  represented  in 
Fig.  4).  Analysis  of  genealogies  failed  to  bear 
out  such  assertions,  and  the  people  did  not 
take  them  seriously.  Possibly  we  have  here, 
emerging  from  the  unconscious,  a half-formed 
ideal  of  how  the  system  should  work.  Another 
possibility  (which  might  put  the  previous  one 
in  a different  light)  is  that  such  assertions  were 
instances  of  special  pleading  voiced  during  dis- 
putes in  order  to  bolster  dubious  marriage 
claims.  Of  this  I have  evidence. 

The  discussion  would  be  incomplete  without 
some  mention  of  moieties  and  subsections 
(indeed,  Levi-Strauss  might  consider  that 
without  them  it  has  not  started).  The  Gidjin- 
gali were  divided  into  two  exogamous  patri- 
moieties,  but  the  people  had  no  notion  of 
marriage-exchange  between  them.  In  view  of 
the  facts  that  a man’s  ZD  belonged  to  the 
opposite  patrimoiety,  and  that  the  system 
ruled  out  both  daughter-exchange  and  sister- 
exchange  (to  which  I shall  return  later),  this 
is  not  surprising. 

The  eight  Gidjingali  subsections  were  named 
divisions  corresponding  to  the  eight  “brother- 
sister”  terminological  categories  indicated  in 
Figures  2 and  4.  They  apparently  diffused  into 
the  area  within  the  last  century  (Elkin,  1950); 
and  they  have  significance  mainly  in  cere- 
monies of  recent  adoption.  They  are  neither 
more  nor  less  significant  for  marriage  regula- 
tions than  the  terminological  categories  to 
which  they  gave  objectivity  (i.e.,  in  principle 
it  means  the  same  to  say  “I  and  everyone  I 
call  ‘B’  may  marry  anyone  we  call  ‘MMBDD’ 
or  ‘FZD’  ” as  to  say  “I  am  in  WAMUD  sub- 
section, and  WAMUD  men  may  marry  either 


174  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

BANGADI  or  GODJOG  women”).  The  men 
of  a subsection  belonged  to  many  different 
patricians  and  tribes  over  a large  area  of 
Arnhem  Land. 

I must  point  out  that  informants  were  able 
to  indicate  the  give-and-take  of  women  in  sub- 
section terms.  In  order  to  relate  the  following 
example  to  Figure  4,  I shall  put  the  appropri- 
ate kin  category  in  brackets  after  the  sub- 
section: BALANG  (MMBS)  gives  Bangadidjan 
(MMBDD)  to  WAMUD  (B),  and  WAMUD 
(B)  gives  Ngaridjan  (ZD)  to  BALANG 
(MMBS).  People  demonstrated  with  blocks  of 
wood  representing  individual  men  and  women. 
I should  point  out  that  folk  regularly  used  sub- 
section terms  to  address  or  refer  to  particular 
individuals.  They  knew  that  men  of  one  sub- 
section did  not  have  corporate  rights  of  dis- 
posal over  all  the  women  of  another,  and  the”y 
did  not  think  of  the  subsections  as  solidary 
groups  exchanging  nieces,  sisters,  or  any  other 
female  kin  in  marriage  (Meggitt,  1962,  Ch.  10; 
also  Meggitt,  Chapter  19,  this  volume). 

Conclusion  : 

Communication  or  Competition? 

I have  demonstrated  the  possibility  of  con- 
structing from  Gidjingali  kinship  terminology 
and  marriage  rules  a hypothetical  model  of 
marriage-exchange  that  verifies  Levi-Strauss’ 

theory  that  systems  of  kinship  and  marriage 
are  really  communication  systems  with  women 
as  the  mediators.  I argued  that,  among  con- 

temporary Gidjingali,  women  did  not  circulate 
in  marriage  along  lines  set  out  in  the  model, 

that  the  people  were  not  using  their  kinship 
system  as  a communication  apparatus  of  the 
kind  postulated,  and  that  they  gave  little 
indication  of  recognizing  (his  as  a possibility 
or  of  holding  it  as  an  ideal.  The  discrepancy 

between  the  model  and  the  facts  is  wide.  Here 

I concur  with  Firth:  “I  am  in  sympathy  with 

the  view  that  the  nature  of  the  evidence,  the 
ethnographic  fact,  is  often  less  important  for 
the  development  of  our  subject  than  the  in- 
ference, the  generalization,  the  theoretical 

argument  presented.  This  can  be  treated  as  a 

‘model,’  an  heuristic  instrument  not  meant  to 
depict  or  mirror  social  reality.  But  at  a certain 
point,  if  the  argument  is  not  meant  as  a purely 


intellectual  exercise,  it  must  apply  to  some  set 
of  demonstrated  facts”  (1966,  p.  2). 

I said  that,  in  some  degree,  the  Gidjingali 
system  of  kinship  and  marriage  regulated  the 
distribution  of  scarce  resources  in  women.  The 
question  that  interests  Ldvi-Strauss  is  why  the 
distribution  should  have  taken  its  characteristic 
Australian  form.  His  faith  in  reciprocity  as  the 
key  to  the  problem  may  well  be  justified.  But 
substantial  modifications  to  his  theory  would 
have  to  be  made  before  it  would  apply  even 
roughly  to  the  Gidjingali.  Here  two  main 
points  would  need  to  be  taken  into  account. 
First,  the  right  to  give  a girl  in  marriage  was 
vested  in  her  M and  MB.I * * * * * * * 9  Patricians,  sub- 
sections, and  patrimoieties  as  corporate  groups 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  decision,  and  there 
was  no  rule  or  ideal  saying  that  they  ought  to. 
A model  of  marriage-exchange  using  these 
groups  as  units  departs  seriously  from  reality. 
Second,  the  Gidjingali  had  a clear  notion  of 
reciprocity  in  marriage.  I have  referred  to 
this  as  “niece-exchange,”  by  which  I mean 
that  a bestowal  placed  the  receiver  under  an 
obligation  to  return  in  kind.  Gidjingali  men 
did  not  have  rights  to  give  their  sisters  or  their 
daughters  in  marriage. 

The  second  fact  is  incompatible  with  Ldvi- 
Strauss’  generalization  that  “in  human  society 
a man  must  obtain  a woman  from  another  man 
who  gives  him  a daughter  or  a sister”  (1962, 
p.  46).  It  also  raises  a question  of  some 
significance  for  all  Aranda-type  systems  (the 
most  widespread  kind  in  Australia).  They  can- 
not be  accounted  for  in  terms  of  daughter- 
exchange  because  a man’s  DD  belongs  to  the 
category  of  his  cross-cousins.  An  explanation 
in  terms  of  sister-exchange,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  likely  to  be  at  variance  with  the  facts  of 
bestowal.  Typically,  females  are  promised  in 
marriage  as  infants  by  relatives  in  a senior 
generation,  not  by  their  male  siblings.  Hypo- 
theses about  sister-exchange  drawn  as  infer- 
ences from  anthropological  kinship  charts  or 
subsection  diagrams  are  unlikely  to  have  any 
counterpart  in  attitudes  of  the  aborigines 
themselves. 


9.  A woman’s  interests  and  her  brother’s  did  not 
always  coincide,  but  I cannot  discuss  here  what  happened 
when  conflict  arose  (see  Hiatt,  1965,  pp.  44,  89). 


The  recent  work  of  Rose  on  age  relationships 
has  an  important  bearing  on  this  subject.10 
Starting  with  Levi-Strauss’  view  that  reci- 
procity is  the  keystone  of  the  kinship  structure, 
it  is  possible  by  following  Rose’s  method  to 
demonstrate  a number  of  interesting  conse- 
quences relevant  to  Australian  systems.  Abori- 
ginal girls  usually  married  at  about  15  years  of 
age,  whereas  men  were  lucky  to  have  a wife 
by  the  age  of  25.  The  discrepancy  was  largely 
a product  of  polygyny  in  communities  where 
the  sex  ratio  was  about  equal.  Let  us  examine 
the  significance  of  this  state  of  affairs  for  three 
possible  types  of  marriage-exchange,  regard- 
less of  the  formal  features  of  the  kinship  system 
— (1)  sister,  (2)  daughter,  (3)  niece. 

I . A reasonable  working  assumption  is  that 
few  women  would  be  more  than  ten  years 
younger  than  their  oldest  brother  and  that  few 
men  would  be  more  than  ten  years  older  than 
their  youngest  sister.  It  would  be  uncommon, 
therefore,  for  a man  married  at  25  to  have  a 
sister  aged  1 5 and  his  1 5-year-old  wife  to  have 

10.  Rose,  i960.  See  also  discussion  between  Rose 
(1965a),  Leach  (1965a),  and  Fox  (1965). 

II.  I have  belatedly  read  Barbara  Lane’s  two  papers, 
“Structural  Contrasts  between  Symmetric  and  Asym- 
metric Marriage  Systems:  A Fallacy,”  Southwestern 
Journal  of  Anthropology,  17(1),  1961 ; and  “Jural  Authority 
and  Affinal  Exchange,”  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropo- 
logy, 18  (2),  1962.  Her  remarks  on  niece-exchange  are 
clearly  relevant  to  my  analysis  of  Aranda-type  systems, 
and  I apologize  for  not  having  given  them  the  attention 
they  deserve. 


Hiatt  Gidjingali  Marriage  Arrangements  i 75 

a brother  aged  at  least  25.  These  would  be  the 
conditions  necessary  for  a sister-exchange  to 
take  place  in  accordance  with  the  minimal 
age  difference  between  a girl  married  at 
puberty  and  her  husband.  In  most  cases  the 
sisters  of  a man  married  at  25  to  a pubertal 
girl  would  be  either  older  than  the  bride’s 
brothers  or,  at  any  rate,  not  much  younger. 

2.  If  a man  married  at  25,  he  could  not 
expect  to  receive  a DD  in  return  for  his  D 
until  he  was  at  least  57  (25  plus  16  plus  16). 

3.  Suppose  a man  has  a twin  sister  who 
marries  at  15.  By  the  time  he  is  31,  he  might 
have  a 15-year-old  ZD.  If  she  marries  a man 
aged  25,  also  with  a twin  sister  who  has  married 
at  15,  her  husband  might  have  a ZD  aged  9. 
If  he  fulfills  his  obligation,  her  father  will 
acquire  a second  wife  by  the  age  of  about  37. 
(I  have  used  the  unlikely  example  of  twin 
sisters  to  strike  a rough  mean  between  older 
and  younger  sisters.) 

If  it  is  fair  to  say  that  Australian  marriage 
systems  were  characterized  both  by  a demand 
for  plural  wives  by  dominant  older  men  and  by 
individual  reciprocity  for  mutual  advantage 
(and  this  I believe  to  be  true),  then  it  might  be 
argued  that  niece-exchange  would  have  satis- 
fied the  requirements  better  than  other  possible 
exchanges.11  This  suggestion,  based  more  on 
man’s  animal  nature  than  his  spirit,  might  in 
the  long  run  provide  a better  starting-point  for 
an  exercise  in  conjectural  history  than  the  view 
that  kinship  and  marriage  are  best  understood 
as  systems  of  communication. 


J9- 


“ Marriage  Classes  ” 

and  Demography  in  Central  Australia 


M.  J.  MEGGITT 


In  comparative  studies  of  primitive  peoples  the 
Australian  aborigines  have  long  held  a special 
place  and,  perhaps  for  this  very  reason,  a num- 
ber of  misconceptions  concerning  their  society 
and  culture  have  entered  the  anthropological 
literature.  This  paper,  which  is  essentially 
negative  in  tone,  aims  at  attacking  one  of  these 
propositions. 

Anthropologists  and  others,  writing  in 
general  terms  about  the  aborigines,  commonly 
emphasize  one  or  other  of  two  points.  Either 
they  single  out  aborigines  as  the  prime  example 
of  simple  hunters  and  gatherers  whose  way  of 
life  is  effectively  and  completely  adapted  to 
their  environment,  or  they  remark  on  the 
complexity  of  aboriginal  social  organization. 

Thus,  from  the  nineteenth  century  onward 
there  have  been  many  statements  such  as  the 
following: 

The  Australian  . . . who  never  thinks  of  the  day 
to  come  and  does  not  possess  other  sources  of  food 
than  those  offered  him  by  the  bush  in  the  shape 
of  game  and  of  scanty  fruit,  develops  an  eminent 
skill  in  obtaining  his  prey  at  any  moment  without 
the  help  of  others  and  without  any  complex  con- 
trivance. . . . This  mode  of  living  makes  him  the 
most  independent  of  men,  but  it  also  stands  in  the 
way  of  all  progress,  forcing  him  to  roam  restlessly 
over  wide  areas  (Semon,  i8gg,  p.  154). 

176 


What  is  disconcerting  is  the  way  in  which 
assertions  about  the  efficiency  of  the  aboriginal 
hunter  early  achieved  the  status  of  stereotypes ; 
the  same  few  literary  references  have  been 
cited  many  times,  with  no  real  understanding 
of  the  need  to  take  even  the  broadest  ecological 
factors  into  account  when  generalizing  about 
aboriginal  custom.  In  particular,  failure  to 
specify  environmental,  demographic,  econo- 
mic, and  technological  differences  has  led  to 
the  acceptance  of  a picture  of  the  Australian 
aboriginal  everywhere  as  a highly  nomadic, 
desert-dwelling  kangaroo-hunter,  with  all  that 
such  exotic  features  imply  in  characterizing  a 
culture.  For  instance  Basedow  says: 

The  aboriginal’s  ideal  of  life  is  attained  when 
he  finds  himself  in  hot  pursuit  of  the  game  which 
shares  with  him  the  wilds  of  his  ancient  haunts. 
. . . The  love  of  the  sport,  the  keenness  of  the 
senses,  and  the  astounding  powers  of  endurance 
are  natural  attributes,  which  the  aboriginal 
alone  knows  how  to  use  to  their  fullest.  These  are 
the  hereditary  gifts  of  man  which  characterize  the 
primitive  hunter  (ig25,  p.  2). 

And  it  is  of  interest  that,  in  an  otherwise 
excellent  description  of  aboriginal  culture, 
Basedow  devotes  to  an  account  of  men’s  hunt- 
ing more  than  five  times  the  space  that  he 


*77 


Meggitt  “ Marriage  Classes ” and  Demography  in  Central  Australia 


gives  to  women’s  food-gathering,  whereas  re- 
cent studies  indicate  that  women’s  contribution 
to  the  daily  diet  is  usually  far  greater  than  that 
of  the  men  (see,  for  instance,  references  cited 
by  Meggitt,  1964a,  1964b). 

Ashley-Montagu  goes  even  further  in  fixing 
this  stereotype  of  the  Australian  as  the  desert 
hunter.  In  Chapter  2 of  Coming  into  Being  among 
the  Australian  Aborigines  (1937),  entitled  “The 
Arunta,  the  type  pattern  of  Australian  culture,” 
he  says  that,  because  of  the  common  origin  of 
Australian  cultures,  “any  particular  culture 
may  in  a general  way  be  taken  to  represent 
the  pattern  of  Australian  culture,  the  type  of 
which  is  represented  by  the  culture  of  the 
Arunta.” 

Only  in  the  last  two  decades  have  anthro- 
pologists demonstrated  any  great  sophistication 
in  recognizing  and  analyzing  regional  varia- 
tions in  demographic  and  environmental  fac- 
tors in  Australia  and  their  effects  on  techno- 
logical, economic,  and  social  practices.  It  is 
unfortunate  that,  because  of  the  effects  of 
European  contacts,  this  insight  has  come  too 
late. 

In  the  same  way,  there  has  developed 
through  the  years  a series  of  stereotypes  as 
early  speculations,  later  hypotheses,  and  subse- 
quent models  concerning  aboriginal  social 
organization  have  been  hypostatized  into  ele- 
ments of  a society  that  never  was. 

Perhaps  the  most  obvious  example  of  this 
process  has  been  the  way  in  which  the  notion 
of  the  horde  became  accepted  as  the  statement 
of  a great  truth  (Radcliffe-Brown,  1930,  1951). 
Ignoring  the  caveats  entered  long  ago  by  such 
investigators  as  Elkin  (1938,  p.  40;  1953)  and 
Piddington  and  Piddington  (1932),  anthropo- 
logists, especially  those  unacquainted  with 
aboriginal  society  at  first  hand,  simply  assumed 
that  the  patrilineal,  patrilocal  horde  was  a real 
entity  to  be  found  everywhere  in  Australia.  It 
is  only  in  the  light  of  recent  statements  to  the 
contrary  by  field  workers  such  as  Berndt 
(1959),  Hiatt  (1962),  and  Meggitt  (1962)  that 

1.  Stanner  (1965),  for  instance,  still  cleaves  to  the 
Radclifle-Brown  model;  however,  I do  not  find  his  argu- 
ments in  this  case  persuasive. 

2.  Sharp’s  pioneering  work  (1940)  should  not  be  over- 
looked, although  he  did  not  try  then  to  answer  such 
questions  as  how  the  age  and  sex  distribution  in  an 
aboriginal  community  affects  marriage  choices. 


this  neat  but  misleading  picture  is  being  re- 
placed— albeit  reluctantly1 2 — by  an  acceptance 
of  the  great  variability  that  actually  existed  in 
aboriginal  local  organization. 

A similar  sequence  of  conceptual  hardening, 
followed  by  slow  recognition  of  the  need  for 
empirical  studies,  has  occurred  in  the  investi- 
gation of  systems  of  kinship  and  marriage 
among  the  aborigines.  Although  field  workers 
such  as  Elkin  (1932,  1938,  1938-40)  and 
Kaberry  (1939)  urged  that  clear  statements  be 
made  of  the  actual  degree  of  variation  or  choice 
incorporated  in  these  systems,  once  again  an- 
thropologists abroad  simply  reified  the  schema- 
tic statements  of  kin  terms  and  of  marriage 
prescriptions  into  concrete  elements  of  social 
behavior  and  assumed  that  this  was  somehow 
the  essential  nature  of  aboriginal  societies,  that 
is,  that  they  were  in  constant  equilibrium. 

In  particular  there  has  been  a failure  to 
appreciate  the  significance  of  demographic 
differences  within  and  among  these  small- 
scale  societies  and  their  importance  in  con- 
ditioning marriage  arrangements.  Only  in  the 
last  few  years  have  fieldworkers  published 
quantified  data  that  bear  directly  on  these 
problems  (Rose,  1960a,  1960b;  Goodale,  1962; 
Meggitt,  1962,  1965b;  Hiatt,  1965). 1 

But,  while  the  results  of  empirical  research 
in  these  several  areas  have  slowly  broken 
through  the  accretion  of  reifications  that  has 
grown  out  of  former  misconceptions,  there  re- 
mains a set  of  social  phenomena  about  which 
many  anthropologists  have  been  firmly  in 
error.  The  phenomena  are  the  modes  of  classi- 
fying the  world  in  social  and  ritual  terms  which 
take  the  form  of  moiety,  section,  and  subsection 
systems;  the  mistake  is  to  regard  these  schematic 
categories  of  cosmic  classification  as  substantive 
or  causally  effective  “marriage  classes,”  to  see 
them  as  the  primary  determinants  of  marriage 
arrangements. 

The  confusion  clearly  stems  from  an  earlier 
anthropological  preoccupation  with  the  deriva- 
tion of  monogamy  from  putative  group  mar- 
riage. For  exponents  of  such  hypothetical 
schemes  the  discovery  in  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury that  certain  aboriginal  tribes  were  divided 
in  halves,  quarters,  or  eighths,  and  that  these 
divisions  were  in  some  sense  exogamous,  was 
of  great  moment.  Here,  at  a stroke,  they  could 
add  the  missing  rungs  to  their  evolutionary 


1 78  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

ladders.  Thus,  from  an  initial  stage  of  group  After  this,  various  specifications  of  mates  in 
marriage  in  which  all  males  of  the  group  terms  of  classificatory  kinship  reduced  mating 
(=  “tribe”?)  might  mate  indiscriminately  to  limited  polygyny  and  finally,  although  not 
with  any  of  the  females,  there  developed  (for  in  aboriginal  societies,  one  and  only  one  wo- 
unknown  reasons)  a situation  in  which  half  man  at  a time  could  be  the  mate  of  a given 
the  women  ( = that  half  including  mothers  man; 

and  sisters?)  were  excluded  as  mates.  The  Obviously  such  a simple  explanatory  scheme 
presence  of  moieties  among  some  aborigines  was  unlikely  to  survive  long  but,  even  though 
was  taken  to  be  a survival  of  that  period.  Simi-  it  succumbed  to  reason,  it  had  significant  ef- 
larly,  the  existence  of  sections  among  other  fects  in  that  subsequently  most  anthropologists, 
tribes  attested  to  an  earlier  extension  of  the  whatever  their  theoretical  orientation,  con- 
prohibitions  on  mating  to  three-quarters  of  the  tinued  to  assume  that  moieties,  sections,  and 
women  of  the  tribe,  just  as  subsections  reflected  subsections  were  “marriage  classes”  in  sub- 
an  extension  to  seven-eighths  of  the  women,  stantially  the  sense  intended  by  writers  such 


Figure  i.  Locations  of  Aboriginal  Tribes  in  Central  Australia. 


Meggitt  “ Marriage  Classes”  and  Demography  in  Central  Australia  i 79 


as  Frazer,  Fison,  and  Morgan.  Thus  this  as- 
sumption not  only  importantly  conditioned  the 
early  attempts  of  men  such  as  N.  W.  Thomas 
(1906)  to  treat  Australian  data  from  the  arm- 
chair; it  also  significantly  biased  the  observa- 
tions made  in  the  field  by  investigators  and 
travelers  as  varied  as  Howitt  (1889a,  1904), 
Spencer  and  Gillen  (1899,  1904,  1927),  Base- 
dow (1925),  and  Chewings  (1936). 

But  even  as  the  speculation  that  moieties, 
etc.,  were  “marriage  classes”  was  congealing 
into  received  dogma,  several  anthropologists 
engaged  in  intensive  field  research  among 
aborigines  were  discovering  data  that  led  them 
to  express  serious  doubts  about  the  proposition. 
Elkin,  guided  by  his  usual  meticulous  concern 
for  the  facts  of  field  work,  was  one  of  the  first 
to  suggest  the  need  for  a reassessment.  Thus  in 
1933  he  said: 

too  much  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  (sections 
and  subsections)  as  methods  of  regulating  mar- 
riage and  of  classifying  kin  at  the  expense  of 
understanding  their  totemic  significance  and  func- 
tion . . . though  their  number  and  incidence  is  in 
ideal  intimately  related  to  social  behavior 
(marriage  and  kinship),  they  are  just  as  much 
concerned  with  the  ordering  of  man’s  relation- 
ship with  nature.  The  latter  function,  indeed, 
may  be  primary  (1933,  p.  66;  see  also  his  com- 
ments in  The  Australian  Aborigines,  1938). 

Considerable  support  for  Elkin  also  came 
from  the  observations  ofKaberry  (1937,  1939), 
Stanner  (1936),  and  Warner  (1937).  All  three 
offered  firsthand  evidence  to  show  that  there 
is  no  necessary  connection  between  the  presence 
of  sections,  etc.,  and  the  regulation  of  marriage 
in  aboriginal  society.  Especially  relevant  was 

3.  Service  (i960)  is  an  exception,  although  I do  not 
think  his  alternative  “environmental”  account  is 
adequate. 

4.  I must  emphasize  that  I am  not  categorically 
denying  any  connection  between  moiety,  section,  or  sub- 
section membership  and  the  selection  of  spouses.  Reay’s 
(1962)  data,  for  instance,  make  it  clear  that  in  some 
circumstances  (as  when  several  remnant  tribes  live  to- 
gether today)  subsection  membership  may  be  an  addi- 
tional and  even  an  important  factor  in  the  arrangement 
of  marriages.  Indeed,  it  may  be  that,  in  situations  of 
European  contact  or  declining  population,  the  greater 
the  failure  of  kinship-phrased  marriage  prescriptions  to 
work,  the  more  likely  are  the  people  to  rely  on  the 
broadly  based  sections  or  subsections  to  define  spouses. 


the  demonstration  that  a tribe  such  as  the 
Kariera,  the  Murngin,  or  the  Murinbata  could 
readily  adopt  a section  or  subsection  system 
that  was  incompatible  with  its  prescriptive 
rules  of  marriage,  and  that  nevertheless  both 
usages  could  be  maintained.  Subsequent  field 
work  by  Falkenberg  (1962),  Meggitt  (1962), 
and  Hiatt  (1965)  confirmed  these  kinds  of 
conclusions. 

Despite  presentation  of  such  evidence  in  the 
1930’s,  however,  the  view  persisted  in  some 
quarters  (and  apparently  is  still  held  today) 
that  among  aborigines  moieties,  sections,  and 
subsections  are  groupings,  membership  in 
which  crucially  determines  marriage  arrange- 
ments or  choices.3  Thus  Lawrence  (1937)  ar- 
gued this  at  some  length  and  with  much 
ingenuity,  although  it  is  difficult  to  see  what 
he  proposed  as  evidence  for  his  assertions. 
Later  Murdock  (1949)  took  Lawrence’s  posi- 
tion as  being  in  some  way  conclusive,  but  again 
it  is  hard  to  discern  the  empirical  basis  for  this. 

In  the  light  of  the  history  I have  so  briefly 
sketched,  I want  to  devote  the  rest  of  this  paper 
to  presenting  further  evidence  (albeit  of  a 
negative  sort)  to  support  the  view  that  sub- 
section systems  are  not  primarily  concerned 
to  regulate  marriage. 4 

The  argument  is  simple.  As  I have  already 
remarked,  data  published  by  Rose,  Goodale, 
Hiatt,  and  myself  indicate  that  demographic 
factors,  or  variations  in  them,  may  in  particular 
cases  exert  considerable  and  fairly  direct  in- 
fluence on  patterns  of  marriage  in  aboriginal 
society.  But,  as  I shall  show,  demographic 
differences  have  little  or  no  effect  on  the  pres- 
ence or  even  on  the  functioning  of  subsection 
systems.  The  reason  seems  clear — marriages, 
as  well  as  marriage  prescription,  concern  finite 
numbers  of  real  people  in  interaction ; if,  as  can 
easily  happen  in  a situation  of  change,  there 
are  not  enough  individuals  to  fill  or  to  exem- 
plify the  pertinent  statuses  or  categories,  the 
system  simply  fails  and  soon  ceases  to  be.  On 
the  other  hand  subsections,  like  moieties  and 
sections,  are  fundamentally  conceptual  sche- 
mata for  the  classification,  not  merely  of 
spouses  or  even  of  people  at  large,  but  of  the 
entire  world  that  the  aboriginal  knows.  That 
is  to  say,  as  long  as  that  universe  exists,  or 
substantial  parts  of  it  persist,  all  categories  can 
be  occupied  (although  not  necessarily  all  by 


180  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


Table  1 

Central  Australian  Tribes — 

-Statistical  Summary 

Tribe 

N 

Xe 

I/D/ 

Id 

c% 

F% 

Walbiri 

■57° 

98.1 

146.0 

1 .48 

35 

50 

Aranda 

758* 

47-4 

3836 

7.66 

27 

47 

Yanmadjari 

506 

31.6 

98.0 

3.10 

27 

50 

Illiaura 

43° 

26.9 

>79-6 

6.67 

36 

50 

Warramunga 

256 

16.0 

84.0 

525 

3f 

48 

Gurindji 

251 

■5-7 

69.6 

4-43 

22 

45 

Kaitish 

235 

14.7 

55-6 

3-78 

32 

58 

Pintubi 

227 

14.2 

95-o 

6.69 

4' 

5' 

Djauan 

227 

14.2 

80.6 

5-67 

18 

40 

Mudbara 

>94 

12. 1 

52.6 

4-34 

32 

40 

Djingili 

142 

8.9 

56.2 

6.31 

21 

44 

Wadaman 

■37 

8.5 

47.0 

5-53 

1 7 

49 

Wambaia 

88 

5-5 

33-0 

6.00 

34 

59 

Kukata 

69 

4-3 

40.8 

9-49 

46 

56 

Yangman 

54 

3-4 

20.8 

6.12 

20 

44 

Mean 

343 

21.4 

♦not  including  197  Aranda  for  whom  the  relevant  information  was  not  available. 


people)  and  the  system  can  continue.  It  follows 
then  that  demographic  changes  and  changes 
in  local  and  economic  organization  (even 
though  considerable)  of  the  kind  that  have 
commonly  been  associated  with  European 
contacts  need  not  entail  a breakdown  in  the 
subsection  system  of  a particular  tribe. 

The  sample  of  tribes  from  which  I draw  my 
data  is  fairly  small— fifteen  tribes  in  all.  They 
are  all  located  in  the  Northern  Territory,  and 
all  are  hinterland  groups  that  normally  reside 
in  arid  to  semi-arid  country  (see  Fig.  1).  Thus 
these  tribes  are  reasonably  comparable  in 
terms  of  important  environmental  variables 
and  in  terms  of  population  densities.  I deli- 
berately avoided  using  groups  from  the  more 
richly  endowed  coastal  regions.  Perhaps  the 
easiest  way  to  locate  the  sample  is  to  note  that 
these  people  are  all  immediate  or  close  neigh- 
bors of  the  Walbiri,  the  tribe  with  which  I have 
worked  intensively  and  which  I know  best.5 

Another  point,  relevant  to  my  argument,  is 
that  members  of  this  sample  have  experienced 
different  degrees  and  kinds  of  contact  with 
Europeans,  ranging  from  mildly  to  markedly 
disruptive.  But  whatever  the  effects  that  these 

5.  I worked  with  the  Walbiri  in  1953-54,  '954-55, 
and  1959-60.  I thank  the  University  of  Sydney  for  its 
financial  support  during  this  time. 


changes  have  had  on  local  organization,  eco- 
nomic conditions,  or  marriage  arrangements, 
none  of  the  tribes  in  the  sample  has  abandoned 
its  subsection  system. 

The  population  figures  I use  here  derive 
from  the  1957  Register  of  Wards  compiled  by 
the  Welfare  Branch  of  the  Northern  Territory 
Administration,  which  indicates — where  ap- 
propriate— section,  subsection,  or  clan  affilia- 
tion as  well  as  tribal  membership.  Comparison 
of  the  Walbiri  figures  given  there  with  my  own 
suggests  (to  me  at  any  rate)  that  the  census  as 
a whole  is  tolerably  accurate.  If  anything,  it 
tends  to  overestimate  some  tribal  numbers  be- 
cause the  mobility  of  the  aborigines  may  lead 
to  double  counting. 

I summarize  the  relevant  figures  in  Table  1. 
The  symbols  I use  have  the  following  meanings : 

N = the  number  of  members  of  the  tribe. 

Xe  = N/16  = the  number  of  males  or  the 
number  of  females  expected  in 
each  subsection  if  they  were 
evenly  distributed;  that  is, 
N/8  = the  number  of  people 
ideally  in  each  subsection. 

/D/  = Xe  — Xo  = the  difference  (ignoring 
arithmetical  sign)  between 
the  expected  and  the 


Meggitt  “Marriage  Classes ” and  Demography  in  Central  Australia  1 8 1 


observed  number  of  males 
or  of  females  in  each 
subsection  of  the  tribe. 
2/D/  = the  sum  of  the  deviations,  ignoring 
arithmetical  sign. 

Id  = 2/D/Xe  = the  sum  of  the  deviations 
divided  by  the  expected 
mean. 

= the  Index  of  Deviation  for 
the  tribe. 

C%  = the  ratio  of  children  under  the  apparent 
age  of  14  years  to  the  total  size  of  the 
tribe. 

F%  = the  ratio  of  females  of  all  ages  to  the 
total  size  of  the  tribe. 

The  first  point  to  note  is  the  range  of  tribal 
size  in  the  sample — from  a mere  54  members 
to  1,570  members.  But  despite  these  differences 
in  size  (which  in  some  cases  at  least  are  directly 
connected  with  different  kinds  of  encounters 
with  Europeans),  every  one  of  these  tribes  still 
has  a subsection  system.  Indeed,  the  names  of 
the  categories  are  cognate  from  tribe  to  tribe, 
and  tribesmen  are  able  to  employ  this  resem- 
blance when  visiting  each  other. 

The  second  important  point  is  that  in  every 
tribe  the  observed  distribution  of  males  and 
females  (both  adults  and  children)  through 

6.  Because  subsections  are  by  definition  correlated 
categories  (through  indirect  matrilineal  descent). 

7.  Naturally  this  conclusion  would  benefit  from  a 
definitive  demonstration  that  the  deviation  of  the  specifi- 
cations of  actual  unions  from  ideal  marriage  prescrip- 
tions in  a tribe  varies  inversely  with  its  numerical  size. 
Although  the  relevant  data  are  not  available  for  all  the 
tribes  in  the  sample  used  here,  it  is  the  case  that  in  the 
largest  tribe,  the  Walbiri,  adherence  to  marriage  rules  is 
clearly  marked — some  92  per  cent  of  unions  do  in  fact 
conform  (see  Meggitt,  1962,  p.  86;  1965). 


the  subsection  system  differs  appreciably  from 
the  expected  mean.  Although  I am  not  con- 
vinced of  the  propriety  of  utilizing  the  Chi- 
squared  test  of  significance  in  such  an  inquiry,6 7 
application  of  the  test  indicates  that  probably 
only  in  one  case  (that  of  the  Kaitish)  is  the 
difference  between  the  observed  and  expected 
distributions  not  statistically  significant.  I can 
given  no  reason  for  the  one  exception. 

Third,  when  Indices  of  Deviation  are  com- 
puted for  all  fifteen  tribes  and  are  correlated 
with  the  actual  size  (N)  of  the  tribes  in  terms 
of  the  Rank  Difference  coefficient,  the  result 
Rhoia.N  = —-37  is  not  statistically  significant. 
That  is  to  say,  there  appears  to  be  no  signifi- 
cant relationship,  positive  or  negative,  be- 
tween simple  size  of  the  tribe  and  the  distribu- 
tion of  tribal  members  through  the  subsections. 

Fourth,  when  the  Indices  of  Deviation  are 
correlated  with  the  ratios  of  children  (C%)  in 
the  fifteen  tribes,  the  result  Rhoid,c%  = +.20 
is  also  not  statistically  significant. 

Fifth,  when  the  Indices  of  Deviation  are  cor- 
related with  the  ratios  of  females  (F%)  in  the 
fifteen  tribes,  the  result  Rhoid,F%  = +.11  is 
again  not  statistically  significant. 

These  seem  to  me  to  be  the  only  calculations 
that  may  safely  be  made  on  the  basis  of  the 
specifications  of  the  available  sample  of  tribes, 
but  I am  persuaded  that  they  enable  us  to  say 
confidently  that,  for  these  hinterland  tribes  at 
any  rate,  intertribal  demographic  differences 
have  no  discernible  effects  on  the  presence  or 
absence  of  subsection  systems.  A fortiori,  then, 
these  results  may  be  taken  to  support  empiri- 
cally the  proposition  that,  among  the  Australian 
aborigines,  subsections  are  not  necessarily  con- 
cerned in  a substantive  manner  in  the  regula- 
tion of  marriage.7 


1 82  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

Appendix 

Examples  of  actual  distributions  of  individuals  through  subsections  and  moieties. 


Walbiri 


Matrimoiety  I 

Matrimoiety  II 

(Djabaldjari  ) 

X 

(Nagamara  ) 

109  (68  men  + 41  boys) 

(24  women + 41  girls) 

65 

(Nabaldjari  ) 

X 

(Djagamara  ) 

107  (75  w + 32  g ) 

(49  m + 58  b ) 

107 

(Djabangari  ) 

X 

(Nambidjimba  ) 

85  (48  m + 37  b ) 

(62  w + 29  g ) 

91 

(Nabangari  ) 

X 

(Djambidjimba) 

104  (72  w + 32  g ) 

(52  m + 37  b ) 

89 

(Djangala  ) 

X 

(Nungarai  ) 

95  (72  m + 23  b ) 

(66  w + 39  g ) 

105 

(Nangala  ) 

X 

(Djungarai  ) 

98  (73  w + 25  g ) 

(68  m + 33  b ) 

IOI 

( Djuburula  ) 

X 

(Nabanangga  ) 

100  (67  m + 33  b ) 

(68  w + 28  g ) 

98 

(Naburula  ) 

X 

(Djabanangga  ) 

125  (95  w + 30  g ) 

(58  m + 35  b ) 

93 

MM  I = 823 

N = 1,570 

MM  II  = 747 

Matrimoiety  I 

255  men +134  boys  = 

389  males 

315  women  + 119  girls 

= 434  females 

Matrimoiety  II 

227  men+  163  boys 

= 390  males 

220  women+137  girls 

= 357  females 

= 779  males + 791  females 

men  = 482 

boys 

297 

women  = 535 

girls  = 

256 

adults  = 1017 

children  = 

553 

Meggitt  “ Marriage  Classes”  and  Demography  in  Central  Australia  183 


Pintubi 


Matrimoiety  l 

Matrimoiety  II 

(Djabaldjari  ) 

X 

(Nagamara 

) 

23  (8  m-l-15  b ) 

(4  w+4  g 

) 

8 

(Nabaldjari  ) 

X 

(Djagamara 

) 

28  (18  w + 10  g ) 

(5  m+  I b 

) 

6 

(Djabangari  ) 

X 

(Nambidjimba 

) 

4 (3  m + i b ) 

(8  w + 7 g 

) 

15 

(Nabangari  ) 

X 

(Djambidjimba  ) 

9 (8  w+i  g ) 

(9  m + 8 b 

) 

'7 

(Djangala  ) 

X 

(Nungarai 

) 

22  (8  m+  14  b ) 

(12  w+  1 g 

) 

'3 

(Nangala  ) 

X 

(Djungarai 

) 

21  (14  w+7  g ) 

(13  m + 3 b 

) 

16 

(Djuburula  ) 

X 

(Nabanangga 

) 

19  (10  m + 9 b ) 

(7  w + 3 g 

) 

10 

(Naburula  ) 

X 

(Djabanangga 

) 

13  (4  w + 9 g ) 

(2  m + 1 b 

) 

3 

MM  I = 139 

N = 227 

MM  II  = 

88 

Matrimoiety  I 
29  men  -f-  39  boys 

= 68  males 

44  women  +27  girls 

= 71  females 

Matrimoiety  II 
29  men-f  13  boys 

= 42  males 

31  women  + 15  girls 

= 46  females 

= 1 10  males  + 1 17 

females 

men  = 58 

boys  = 

52 

women  = 75 

girls  = 

42 

adults  = 133 

children  = 

94 

184  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


Yangman 


Matrimoiety  I 

Matrimoiety  II 

(Djabaldjari  ) 

X 

(Nagamara 

) 

4 (3  m+i  b ) 

(3  w+°  g 

) 

3 

(Nabaldjari  ) 

X 

(Djagamara 

) 

4 (3  W+  I g ) 

(3  m + o b 

) 

3 

(Djabangari  ) 

X 

(Nambidjimba 

) 

1 (1  m + o b ) 

(2  W+I  g 

) 

3 

(Nabangari  ) 

X 

(Djambidjimba  ) 

2 (1  w+  1 g ) 

(2  m + o b 

) 

2 

(Djangala  ) 

X 

(Nungarai 

) 

5 (5  m + o b ) 

(1  w + 3 g 

) 

4 

(Nangala  ) 

X 

(Djungarai 

) 

4 (4  w+o  g ) 

(4  m+4  b 

) 

8 

(Djuburula  ) 

X 

(Nabanangga 

) 

2 (2  m+  0 b ) 

(1  w + o g 

) 

1 

(Naburula  ) 

X 

(Djabanangga 

) 

3 (3  w+o  g ) 

(5  m + o b 

) 

5 

MM  I = 25 

N = 54 

MM  II  = 29 

Matrimoiety  I 

1 1 men+  1 boy  = 

12  males 

11  women + 2 girls  = 

13  females 

Matrimoiety  II 

1 4 men  + 4 boys  = 

18  males 

7 women + 4 girls  = 

1 1 females 

— 30  males  -f  24  females 

Men  = 25 

boys  — 

5 

women  = 18 

girls  = 

6 

adults  = 43 

children  = 

1 1 

20. 


Demographic  and  Ecological 

Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections 


ARAM  A.  YENGOYAN 


Aboriginal  Australian  social  structure  has  been 
traditionally  regarded  as  a complex  cultural 
elaboration  which  integrates  whole  societies  or 
“tribes.”  Most  sociological  interpretations  have 
stressed  the  formal  aspects  of  structure,  al- 
though Kroeber  (1938,  p.  217)  has  attempted 
to  demonstrate  that  formal  aspects  of  Austra- 
lian social  organization  (such  as  clans,  moie- 
ties, descent  groups,  and  totemism)  are  secon- 
dary structural  patterns  which  rely  on  primary 
patterns  such  as  subsistence  and  locality.  In 
summary,  Kroeber  (1938^.218)  concluded 
that  the  elaborate  system  of  Australian  mar- 
riages takes  the  form  of  unconscious  experiment 
in  the  manner  of  fads  and  fashions.  Though 
there  is  no  disagreement  with  Kroeber’s  dis- 
tinction between  primary  and  secondary  struc- 
tures, one  can  examine  the  functions  and  inter- 
relationship between  section  systems  and  en- 
vironmental and  demographic  factors. 

The  specific  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to 
examine  the  ecological  and  demographic  fac- 
tors which  regulate  different  section  systems.1 
The  following  points  will  be  investigated : 

1.  I wish  to  thank  the  following  individuals  for  their 
assistance,  comments,  and  criticism  of  the  original  and 
revised  versions  of  this  paper:  J.  A.  Barnes,  J.  B.  Birdsell, 
Fred  Eggan,  Clifford  Geertz,  Ernest  Goldschmidt,  L.  R. 
Hiatt,  M.  J.  Meggitt,  David  M.  Schneider,  Elman  R. 
Service,  H.  Clyde  Wilson,  and  Eric  R.  Wolf. 


1 . A correlation  between  different  section 
systems  and  certain  environmental  conditions 
is  present  and  empirically  observable. 

2.  Population  size  is  an  important  feature  in 
the  operation  of  section  systems  and  in  part 
determines  their  ideal  functioning. 

3.  Section  systems  may  also  function  in  re- 
gulating interaction  over  a delimited  area,  thus 
serving  as  a means  of  “insuring”  utilizable 
resources. 

The  analysis  of  such  problems  is  always 
limited  due  to  the  scarcity  of  reliable  quanti- 
fied data  on  population  structure,  areas  of 
exploitation,  etc.  Population  models,  which 
are  constructed  from  a generalized  knowledge 
of  hunting  and  collecting  groups,  may  be  uti- 
lized as  an  operational  device  to  illuminate 
certain  problems  and  areas  of  investigation. 
The  population  pyramid  in  this  paper  repre- 
sents such  a device,  since  accounts  of  precon- 
tact aboriginal  population  structure  were  un- 
obtainable. 


Method 

The  population  parameter  (population  size, 
area,  and  density)  represents  the  primary  unit 
in  relating  environmental  factors  to  section 

185 


1 86  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

systems,  and  also  the  pivotal  point  in  the  ideal 
operation  of  section  systems  as  regards  their 
function  in  marriage  regulation.  Birdsell  (1953, 
pp.  205-206)  has  demonstrated  a .8  correlation 
between  mean  annual  rainfall  and  population 
density  for  1 23  ecologically  homogeneous  tribes. 
Since  water  is  the  most  important  environ- 
mental variable,  it  has  a direct  influence  on 
the  type  of  local  biota  and  cultural  variables 
which  regulate  a group’s  extractive  efficiency 
and  population  structure. 

Population  size,  area,  and  density  are  then 
correlated  with  different  section  systems.  The 
population  pyramid  is  utilized  to  demonstrate 
how  tribal  size  may  set  specific  limitations  on 
the  functioning  of  any  marriage  system.  Popu- 
lation area  figures  are  not  always  available  nor 
reliable.  However,  one  readily  notices  from 
Tindale’s  (1940)  map  that  the  largest  tribal 
areas  are  located  in  extreme  arid  conditions 
and  are  commonly  characterized  by  the  occur- 
rence of  subsection  systems. 

Environment  and  Subsistence 

Rainfall  represents  the  determirfing  variable 
for  the  existence  of  different  vegetation  belts 
in  Australia.  Mean  annual  rainfall  varies  from 
2-3  inches  to  150  inches  per  year.  Highest 
aridity  occurs  in  the  center  of  the  continent;  as 
one  moves  outward  toward  the  coastal  regions 
rainfall  increases  reaching  a maximum  in  the 
Cairns  rain  forest  of  Queensland  (G.  Taylor, 
■943;  P-  83). 

Mean  annual  rainfall  is  not  always  an  ade- 
quate criterion  for  available  surface  waters.  For 
example,  unearned  or  secondary  waters  may 
fall  in  one  tribal  area  but  are  utilized  in 
another.  This  phenomenon  is  present  where 
one  finds  large  rivers  with  substantial  seasonal 
drainages.  An  example  of  how  secondary 
waters  affect  assumed  population  densities  oc- 
curs in  the  region  of  the  Murray  and  Darling 
river  drainages.  The  mean  rainfall  in  this  area 
is  5-10  inches  per  year;  however,  population 
densities  are  exceedingly  high  on  the  riverine 
frontages.  Both  rivers  have  their  sources  in  the 
high  dividing  ranges  to  the  east  which  are 
characterized  by  a 30-50  inches  of  rainfall. 
The  runoff  from  these  drainage  systems  is 
sufficient  enough  to  produce  a flourishing  biota 


and  a relatively  high  population  density  down- 
stream (Commonwealth  of  Australia,  1953). 

Even  in  areas  with  an  adequate  rainfall, 
deserts  may  be  common.  This  phenomenon 
occurs  in  regions  lacking  zinc  and  copper  as 
trace  elements,  thus  making  any  type  of  vege- 
tation quite  sparse  (Anderson  and  Underwood, 
1959.  P-97)- 

The  mapping  of  surface  water  supplies  re- 
presents a difficult  task.  Johnston  (1940) 
marked  available  water  supplies  along  abori- 
ginal routes  for  the  western  portion  of  South 
Australia.  Although  this  account  is  quite 
limited,  it  does  provide  an  adequate  descrip- 
tion of  routes  and  names  dealing  with  water 
supplies.  Routes  in  the  Ooldea  region  are  from 
one  water  source  to  the  next,  thus  the  utiliza- 
tion of  a route  varies  with  seasonal  differences 
in  water  supplies.  Water  is  derived  from  rock 
holes,  soaks,  wells,  claypans,  dams,  roots  of  the 
desert  oak,  and  the  mallee  tree.  The  more  im- 
portant water  supplies  have  some  totemic 
significance  and  play  an  important  part  in 
aboriginal  ceremonial  and  social  life  (Johnston 
1940,  pp-  34-35)- 

Since  water  supply  distribution  are  unavail- 
able for  the  remainder  of  the  continent  and 
mean  annual  rainfall  data  are  not  precise 
enough,  effective  annual  rainfall  may  be  uti- 
lized. Effective  annual  rainfall  is  the  amount 
of  rain  utilized  after  evaporation  is  excluded. 
Hence,  in  the  Australian  case,  rain  in  excess 
of  one-third  of  the  evaporation  is  termed  effec- 
tive rainfall.  Evaporation  in  most  areas  is  high 
and  in  the  central  regions  it  may  exceed  100 
inches  per  annum.  Approximately  76  per  cent 
of  Australia  has  agrowingperiod  offour  months 
or  less  (Commonwealth  Scientific  and  Indus- 
trial Research  Organization,  i960,  p.  30). 
Australian  vegetation  patterns  are  directly  re- 
lated with  effective  annual  rainfall.  Rainforests 
exist  in  coastal  Queensland,  eastern  New  South 
Wales,  southern  Victoria,  and  the  southwestern 
portions  of  West  Australia,  while  spinifex  desert 
areas  are  located  in  the  central  and  western 
parts  of  the  continent. 

The  diet  of  the  Australian  aborigine  is  basi- 
cally vegetarian  (Meggitt,  1964b),  though 
nearly  all  edible  animals  and  plant  foods  are 
consumed.  Diets  vary  from  desert  areas  to 
coastal  regions,  yet  in  both  cases  the  samples 
substantiate  the  claim  that  the  aborigines 


Yengoyan  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections 


exploit  practically  all  sources  of  available  energy 
and  cover  the  full  range  of  foods  which  may  be 
economically  utilized.  The  Walbiri  of  central 
Australia  represent  a good  example  of  how  a 
desert  group  has  extensively  utilized  the  spini- 
fex  environment  (Sweeney,  1947,  p.  289). 
Native  plant  foods  are  divided  into  three 
groups : bush  fruits,  root  foods,  and  seeds.  Bush 
fruits  consist  of  wild  oranges,  wild  figs,  desert 
plums,  berries,  desert  tomatoes,  desert  raisins, 
desert  yams,  and  onion  grass,  while  seeds  con- 
sist of  pod  seeds,  grasses,  and  wild  herbage. 
The  dominant  animal  foods  are  kangaroos, 
euros,  desert  marsupials,  rock  wallabies,  lizards, 
carpet  snakes,  and  rabbits.  Honey,  eggs,  gall 
insects,  and  grubs  are  other  miscellaneous  foods 
(Cleland  and  Johnston,  1933,  p.  114).  Annual 
precipitation  is  about  eight  inches,  thus  the 
growing  period  is  quite  short  though  it  is  longer 
than  in  the  Lake  Eyre  region  to  the  south. 

Even  in  high  precipitation  areas  such  as 
southeast  Australia,  no  single  grain  is  obtain- 
able in  vast  quantitites.  All  forms  of  life  com- 
pete for  available  resources,  yet  one  notes  a 
regulation  of  activities  among  animals  and 
man  which  to  a certain  extent  are  mutually 
interdependent  relationships.  As  one  moves 
from  the  center  to  the  well-watered  fringe  areas, 
resources  are  more  abundant  and  seasonal 
availability  is  longer.  Utilized  resources  in- 
crease in  quantity  and  quality  on  the  coastal 
regions  where  a new  biota  is  exploited.  Coastal 
tribes  have  access  to  marine  resources  such  as 
fish,  whales,  dugong,  turtles,  and  shellfish,  as 
well  as  different  plant  foods  such  as  coastal 
yams,  lilies,  pandanus,  cycad  nuts,  and 
numerous  varieties  of  roots  and  grasses. 

For  a relatively  dry  continent  such  as  Aus- 
tralia, ranging  from  tropical  to  desert  habitats, 
the  variation  in  flora  will  be  dependent  to  a 
large  degree  on  rainfall.  The  biomass  of  the 
flora  will  be  expected  to  vary  directly  with  the 
intensity  of  annual  rainfall.  Since  man  stands 
at  the  peak  of  the  food  chain,  exploiting  all 
lower  trophic  levels  (animals  and  plants)  popu- 
lation densities  must  also  respond  to  rainfall 
variation. 

All  technological  implements  and  skills  re- 
volve around  the  primary  subsistence  patterns 
of  hunting  and  food  collecting.  Wood,  bone, 
and  stone  are  the  most  commonly  utilized 
materials,  with  the  proportion  of  utilization 


187 

varying  with  the  habitat.  The  two  most  im- 
portant extractive  devices  are  the  stone  axe  or 
chopper  and  the  digging  stick.  Sharp  (1952, 
p.  69)  stated  that  among  the  Yir  Yiront,  the 
stone  axe  was  not  only  an  important  male  im- 
plement, but  also  possessed  a high  degree  of 
ritual  value  since  it  symbolized  masculinity 
and  age.  Tindale  and  Noone  (1941,  p.  122) 
observed  similar  conditions  in  central  and  wes- 
tern Australia.  Stone  is  used  for  flakes,  scrapers, 
bulbs,  and  adzes;  however,  in  most  cases  each 
of  these  tools  may  be  remanufactured  from  one 
type  to  another  (Tindale,  1957,  p.  40).  The 
adze  is  a crucial  tool  since  it  is  used  to  make 
boomerangs,  spearheads,  sacred  objects,  water 
bowls,  winnowing  troughs,  etc.  Women’s  tools 
are  digging  sticks,  clubs,  and  occasionally  stone 
implements. 

Both  sexes  are  fully  involved  in  extracting 
daily  food  supplies.  Hunting  activities  are  pre- 
dominantly men’s  work,  while  women  collect 
plant  foods,  seeds,  eggs,  and  occasionally  hunt 
rabbits.  Women  are  often  better  “trackers” 
than  men,  although  if  large  game  is  seen  or 
water  is  located,  the  women  will  tell  the  men 
who,  in  turn,  will  decide  what  course  of  action 
to  follow.  Females  will  collect  foods  up  to  four 
or  five  miles  from  a campsite,  while  men  will 
go  nearly  seven  or  eight  miles  from  a camp  in 
order  to  hunt  large  game.  When  foods  are  ex- 
ploited within  a 6-  to  8-mile  radius  from  a 
camp,  the  local  group  will  shift  to  another  site. 
Collecting  is  generally  foreign  to  men’s  work, 
although  hunters  will  gather  plant  foods  to  fill 
immediate  needs  while  away  from  the  camp. 

All  food  is  distributed  among  the  local  group 
and  promptly  consumed.  Ideally  the  local 
group  claims  everything  in  their  own  territory ; 
however,  if  certain  foods  are  abundant,  any 
individual  may  partake  in  it. 

Tribes  and  Sections 

The  population  unit  employed  in  this  paper  is 
the  tribe.  Though  there  is  much  controversy 
about  definitions  and  formal  aspects  of  abori- 
ginal local  organization  (Birdsell,  1958;  Hiatt, 
1962;  Stanner,  1965)  and  about  the  concept  of 
the  tribe  (Berndt,  1959;  Davidson,  1938a),  the 
use  of  the  term  tribe  is  primarily  arbitrary.  Since 
the  majority  of  trained  anthropological  field 


1 88  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

workers  as  well  as  other  observers  have  pre- 
sented demographic  and  cultural  data  under 
this  or  that  “named”  tribe,  the  problem  of 
defining  a tribe  to  fit  all  particular  cases  is  not 
necessary.  However,  a tribe  may  be  considered 
as  a reference  group  by  which  individuals  iden- 
tify with  each  other  either  through  common 
language,  ritual  and  legend,  kinship  and 
marriage,  or  locality. 

The  Australian  tribe  possesses  no  effective 
political  and  economic  control.  Although  tribal 
functions  are  minimal  as  regards  sociocultural 
factors,  it  does  represent  an  effective  breeding 
unit.  Intratribal  marriages  constitute  from 
80-90  per  cent  of  all  unions  (Tindale,  1953), 
and  it  may  be  suggested  that  rates  ofintertribal 
marriages  may  vary  with  demographic  factors. 
Whereas  the  local  group  possesses  mechanisms 
for  socioeconomic  activity  and  social  control, 
the  tribe  as  an  “ideally”  endogamous  unit, 
though  not  always,  would  designate  a genetic 
and  demographic  unit. 

Sections  and  subsections  should  not  be  fully 
equated  with  marriage  classes,  nor  do  sections 
only  function  in  the  regulation  of  marriage 
choices  (Meggitt,  Chapter  19,  this  volume). 
The  same  author  (1964a)  has  noted  that  sec- 
tions and  subsections  “were  essentially  ritual 
categories,”  while  Elkin  has  stated  that  “what 
the  [sections]  do  is  to  summarize  relations  into 
four  groups,  in  one  of  which  a possible  spouse 
is  normally  found;  but  in  the  same  group 
various  other  types  of  relations  are  also  in- 
cluded.” The  determination  of  marriage  mates 
is  based  on  kinship  relationships. 

Thus,  the  section  system  is  a shorthand  index 
for  combining  kin  relations  into  categories  for 
multiple  purposes,  be  it  possible  marriage 
mates,  ritual,  or  economic  activity.  Finer  dis- 
tinctions within  each  section  category  are  left 
to  genealogical  connections  and  locality.  Meg- 
gitt (1962,  p.  169)  also  recognized  sections  as 
simplified  combinations  of  individuals  when  he 
stated  that  “basically,  [the  Walbiri]  regard 
subsections  as  a summary  expression  of  social 
relationships  that  may  sometimes  be  practically 
useful  but  just  as  often  is  dangerously  ambi- 
guous.” Hiatt’s  (1965,  p.  50)  interpretation  of 
Gidjingali  subsections  followed  Meggitt’s  ana- 
lysis. 

While  marriages  are  based  on  kinship  rela- 
tions and  locality,  the  analysis  of  marriages  is 


commonly  summarized  in  terms  of  sections  or 
subsections.  Thus,  preferred,  alternative,  and 
wrong  marriages  stem  from  the  kinship  system 
but  are  presented  within  a section-subsection 
framework.  In  this  paper,  sections  and  sub- 
sections are  utilized  as  a summary  index  of 
marriages,  and  not  as  the  determining  factor 
in  regulating  marriage  choices. 

The  Population  Parameter 

For  operational  purposes,  a parameter  is  de- 
fined as  all  key  quantifiable  variables  that 
structure  a population.  Furthermore,  a para- 
meter not  only  designates  the  population  of  a 
particular  unit  but  also  circumscribes  one  unit 
from  other  comparable  ones.  Thus,  to  a gene- 
ticist, the  parameter  delimits  effective  breeding 
units  which  may  be  compared  to  one  another 
for  the  demarcation  of  dines.  In  utilizing  the 
tribe  as  a unit  of  comparison,  the  governing 
variables  which  characterize  the  demographic 
structure  are  population  size,  area,  and  density. 
Size  and  area  co-vary  with  environmental  fac- 
tors, while  density  is  the  function  of  both 
variables. 

Since  Birdsell  (1953)  has  demonstrated  a 
correlation  between  population  density  and 
mean  annual  rainfall  for  ecologically  homo- 
geneous tribes,  a relationship  may  also  exist 
between  population  size  and  area,  and  rain- 
fall. Tindale  (1940,  p.  150)  noted  that  the  size 
of  tribal  areas  was  inversely  proportional  to 
rainfall.  In  regions  where  tribal  areas  were 
large,  the  annual  rainfall  was  remarkably  low. 
There  was  also  a high  degree  of  correlation  be- 
tween tribal  limits  and  ecological-geographical 
boundaries.  Lines  of  communication  and  mi- 
gration tended  to  follow  natural  lines  of  least 
resistance  across  the  continent,  often  clinging 
to  open  plains,  creeks,  rivers,  and  lines  of  water 
along  ranges,  and  avoiding  dense  forests  and 
rugged  mountains.  Tindale’s  (1940)  tribal  map 
reveals  that  the  largest  tribal  areas  occur  in  the 
central  and  western  deserts,  while  the  small, 
more  fragmented  areas  are  along  the  coast  and 
in  other  favorable  habitats. 

The  average  Australian  tribal  size  is  given 
by  Krzwicki  (1934,  p.  305)  as  500,  with  a 
range  from  150  to  2,500.  Elkin’s  (1964,  p.  25) 
figure  for  the  tribal  average  is  500  to  600,  with 


Yengoyan  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections 


a range  from  ioo  to  1,500.  Tindale  (1940)  also 
recognized  an  average  tribal  size  of  500,  though 
he  noted  that  it  may  be  high.  Lumholtz  re- 
garded tribal  size  as  about  200  members  in 
regions  adjoining  rain  forests  (Wheeler,  1910, 
p.  33).  In  general,  one  would  expect  to  find 
tribes  whose  sizes  are  lower  than  the  continental 
average  on  the  coastal  and  interior  coastal 
areas.  Although  the  coastal  tribes  have  less  area 
and  fewer  individuals,  they  still  possess  the 
highest  population  densities. 

In  order  to  observe  variations  in  population 
size  and  density,  different  environmental  areas 
will  be  briefly  discussed.  In  West  Australia, 
from  the  Kimberleys,  southwest  to  Eighty  Mile 
Beach,  a number  of  tribal  groups  on  the  coast 
and  interior  coastal  area  utilize  both  marine 
and  terrestrial  respurces.  The  coastal  Kariera 
are  one  of  the  best  reported  groups  (Radcliffe- 
Brown,  1931).  The  Kariera  occupied  an  area 
of  3,750  square  miles  with  an  estimated  popu- 
lation of  750.  The  tribe  was  divided  into  20  to 
25  local  groups,  each  occupying  a defined  area. 
Band  size  varied  from  30  to  40  individuals. 
Population  density  in  this  relatively  favorable 
environment  was  one  person  per  five  square 
miles.  Elkin  estimated  that  the  welbwatered 
portion  of  the  Kimberley  district  may  have  had 
an  overall  population  of  10,000  living  on 
65,000  square  miles,  or  one  person  per  six  or 
seven  square  miles  (Meggitt,  1964,  p.  166). 
Reports  by  Hernandez  (1941),  Stanner  (1932), 
and  Webb  (1933)  for  other  coastal  and  interior 
coastal  groups  indicated  similar  population 
conditions. 

Further  southwest,  near  the  Swan  River, 
Stirling  estimated  one  native  per  two  square 
miles  during  the  early  years  of  the  settlement, 
while  Radcliffe-Brown  (1930,  p.689)  calcu- 
lated one  person  per  four  square  miles.  Popu- 
lation densities  become  progressively  lower  in 
the  eastern  portion  of  West  Australia  (that  is, 
Great  Sandy  Desert,  Gibson  Desert).  The 
Rawlinson  Ranges  area,  from  Lake  Christo- 
pher east  to  the  western  edge  of  the  Petermann 

2.  These  figures,  as  well  as  those  for  the  Musgrave 
area  of  N.  W.  South  Australia,  were  obtained  in  dis- 
cussion with  W.  McDougall,  the  native  patrol  officer  for 
South  Australia,  who  is  employed  by  the  Department  of 
Supply  and  attached  to  the  Weapons  Research  Establish- 
ment, Woomera,  South  Australia.  Population  data  for 
the  Rawlinsons  was  collected  in  1955-56. 


189 

Ranges,  may  have  had  a density  of  one  person 
per  30  to  40  square  miles.  This  area  of  approxi- 
mately 5,400  square  miles  contained  a popula- 
tion of  172  persons.2  For  the  whole  of  West 
Australia,  Radcliffe-Brown  (1930,  p.  695)  esti- 
mated a former  aboriginal  population  of  52,000 
and  an  overall  population  density  of  one  person 
per  18.8  squaie  miles. 

The  northern  section  of  the  state  of  South 
Australia  (that  is,  north  of  Port  Augusta)  re- 
presents one  of  the  lowest  rainfall  areas  in 
Australia.  This  area  is  approximately  300,000 
square  miles  and  has  a rainfall  average  of  less 
than  ten  inches  per  year.  Tribes  with  higher 
population  densities  occupied  the  area  of  the 
Murray  drainage.  Radcliffe-Brown  (1930,  p. 
690)  estimated  an  aboriginal  population  of 
6,000  for  the  southern  portion  while  the 
northern  part  of  the  state  may  have  had  popu- 
lation densities  as  low  as  one  person  per  eighty 
square  miles.  The  Musgrave  Ranges  in  the 
northeast  had  a population  density  of  one  per- 
son per  30-35  square  miles,  though  .variations 
between  the  ranges  and  plains  alter  this  esti- 
mate. The  Ooldea  groups  in  western  South 
Australia  were  tribally  fragmented  due  to  con- 
flicts over  trade  routes  and  sacred  waters.  From 
Berndt’s  (1942)  account,  one  deduces  that  the 
Ooldea  area  may  have  supported  a relatively 
large  population  though  the  overall  density  was 
exceedingly  low.  Howitt  (1891,  p.  33)  estimated 
the  Dieri  of  the  eastern  lakes  region  at  1,100 
members  with  a density  of  one  person  per 
twenty  square  miles;  however,  this  density 
figure  may  be  too  high  due  to  the  exceedingly 
poor  environmental  conditions.  A total  popu- 
lation of  approximately  3,000  for  the  whole  of 
the  lakes  region  may  have  been  reasonable 
enough  (Elkin,  1931,  pp.  51-52). 

Southeast  Australia  (Victoria  and  eastern 
New  South  Wales)  represents  the  most  exten- 
sive cultural  elaboration  and  highest  popula- 
tion densities  in  Australia.  Curr  (1886-87) 
estimated  the  total  Gippsland  population  at 
1,500,  and  Howitt’s  (1904,  p.  23)  figures  for 
whole  Gippsland  area  yielded  a population 
density  of  one  person  per  9-10  square  miles. 
Radcliffe-Brown  (1930,  p.  691)  assumed  an 
irreducible  minimum  figure  of  one  person  per 
fifteen  square  miles  for  the  Gippsland  area.  For 
the  Mt.  Burr  and  Mt.  Gambier  areas,  Camp- 
bell (1939,  p.  35)  concluded  that  2,000  abori- 


i go  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

gines  lived  in  this  region  in  1895  though  they 
were  being  exterminated  at  a rate  of  50  per 
cent  every  five  years.  On  the  southern  frontage 
of  the  Murray  and  Darling  rivers,  Howitt 
(1904,  p.  53)  designated  an  area  of  2, 500  square 
miles  occupied  by  ten  tribes  totaling  1,200 
individuals.  Population  density  in  this  area  was 
approximately  one  person  per  two  square  miles. 
For  the  same  area,  Curr  estimated  one  person 
per  2.3  to  3 square  miles  (Radcliffe-Brown, 
1 930>  P-  691)  and  Wallace  in  the  1870’s  re- 
ported that  local  groups  along  the  Murray 
drainage  consisted  of  60  to  100  people  (Camp- 
bell, 1934,  p.  28). 

Coastal  New  South  Wales  had  an  estimated 
population  of  25,000  with  a denser  population 
on  the  north  coast  (Radcliffe-Brown,  1930,  p. 
695).  Meggitt  (1964,  p.  165)  noted  that  early 
observations  of  the  Sydney  district  from  Botany 
Bay  to  Broken  Bay  suggested  a population 
range  of  1,500  to  3,000  occupying  a narrow 
coastal  strip  of  400  to  500  square  miles. 

The  Queensland  coastal  area  was  generally 
similar  in  tribal  densities  to  the  southern  coastal 
regions.  From  Broad  Sound  to  the  Clarence 
River,  the  population  density  was  one  person 
per  three  to  four  square  miles  (Radcliffe- 
Brown,  1930,  p.  694).  On  the  Cape  York 
Peninsula,  the  Yir  Yiront  had  an  average 
density  of  one  person  per  4.8  square  miles,  but 
then  density  was  twice  as  high  (one  person  per 
2.4  square  miles)  if  only  utilized  land  is  con- 
sidered (Sharp,  1940,  p.  486). 

In  general,  Arnhem  Land  population  densi- 
ties were  unusually  high  and  are  comparable 
to  the  coastal  tribes  of  Victoria,  New  South 
Wales,  and  Queensland.  The  Groote  Eylandt 
inhabitants  in  1939  numbered  300  to  350,  with 
a density  of  one  person  per  three  square  miles 
(Rose,  1960b,  p.  12).  Fliatt  (1965,  p.  17)  re- 
ported Gidjingali  population  density  at  two 
persons  per  square  mile  on  an  occupied  area 
of  150  square  miles.  The  Carpentarian  Gulf 
tribes  also  had  an  overall  density  of  two  persons 
per  square  mile  according  to  Thomson  ( 1 934a) . 
The  Kaiadilt  of  Bentinck  Island  showed  com- 
parable and  even  higher  population  densities. 
Tindale  (1962b,  p.  304)  stated  that 

The  density  of  population  for  the  whole  of 

Bentinck  Island  area  in  1940  (the  last  year  when 

all  were  present)  was  1 .7  persons  per  square  mile 


of  total  land  and  reef  surface,  or  over  6.8  persons 
for  each  square  mile  of  reef.  Since  part  of  the  total 
area  is  inaccessible,  and  only  used  at  some  risk  (as 
indicated  by  two  tragic  episodes  accompanying 
efforts  to  reach  Allen  Island  in  1940  and  1947) 
only  about  14  square  miles  of  reef  were  in  constant 
use,  i.e.,  over  8 persons  obtained  their  food  on 
each  square  mile  of  reef  (1962b,  p.  304). 

Murngin  population  density  was  about  one 
person  per  eight  or  nine  square  miles  (Warner, 
1 93 7 5 P-  16).  On  the  Daly  River,  100  to  150 
Murinbata  occupied  500-700  square  miles 
(Stanner,  1936,  p.  187). 

As  one  moves  into  the  more  rigorous  environ- 
ments of  central  Australia,  densities  become 
lower  since  desert  populations  need  more  land 
to  support  themselves.  The  Aranda,  who  oc- 
cupied the  more  productive  portions  of  central 
Australia,  numbered  less  than  2,000  and  oc- 
cupied over  25,000  square  miles  (Spencer  and 
Gillen,  1899).  For  the  Walbiri,  Meggitt  (1962, 
p.  32)  concluded  that  the  precontact  popula- 
tion ranged  from  1,000  to  1,200  in  an  area  of 
35,000  square  miles.  The  average  population 
density  was  one  person  per  35  square  miles. 
These  low  densities  are  comparable  to  other 
desert  areas  such  as  the  Rawlinson  Ranges  and 
the  Pitjandjara  of  the  Musgrave-Mann-Tom- 
kinson  Ranges. 

The  total  aboriginal  populatiqn  of  Australia 
had  an  overall  average  density  of  one  person 
per  twelve  square  miles.  Radcliffe-Brown’s 
(1930)  enumeration  of  the  aboriginal  popula- 
tion by  states  is  as  follows: 


District 

Est.  No.  of 
Aborigines 

Area 
(. sq . mi.) 

Density 

Western 

Australia 

52,000 

975,920 

One  per 

18.8 

South 

Australia 

10,000 

380,070 

One  per 

CO 

CO 

b 

Victoria 

1 1 ,500 

87,884 

One  per 

7.6 

Queensland 

100,000 

670,500 

One  per 

6.7 

New  South 

Wales 

40,000 

3 '0,372 

One  per 

7.8 

Northern 

Territory 

35, 000 

523,620 

One  per 

15.0 

Tasmania 

2,500 

26,215 

One  per 

10.5 

251,000 

2,974,58' 

One  per 

"•9 

Yengoyan  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections  igi 


The  remainder  of  the  population  data,  which 
has  been  extracted  from  Curr  (1886-87), 
Krzwicki  (1934)  and  other  sources,  is  listed 
in  Tables  1,  2,  and  3. 

From  the  variation  in  population  size  and 
densities,  one  notices  how  ecological  factors 
interplay  in  limiting  and  preserving  environ- 
ments. “Primitive”  man’s  territoriality  is  not 
only  limited  by  cultural  factors,  but  also  by 
environmental  and  demographic  components 
which  regulate  population  size  and  tribal 
interaction. 


Section  Systems  and 
the  Population  Parameter 

The  correlation  between  section  systems  and 
each  component  of  the  population  para- 
meter is  listed  in  Tables  1,  2,  and  3.  In  each 
table,  the  absence  of  sections,  which  is  labeled 
“o,”  the  moiety  organization  (“2”),  sections 
(“4”),  and  subsections  “(8”)  are  horizontally 
demarcated.  Table  1 lists  tribal  areas  by 
square  miles,  while  Tables  2 and  3 deal  with 
population  size  and  density  respectively.  Since 
the  samples  are  relatively  small,  the  median 
rather  than  the  average  or  mean  has  been 
utilized  in  each  case.  From  Fable  1,  note  that 
with  an  increase  in  tribal  area,  there  is  a com- 
plementary change  in  the  number  of  sections, 
except  from  “o”  to  “2.” 

Tribal  sizes  also  increase  with  the  number  of 
sections.  With  a sample  of  76  cases,  this  cor- 
relation may  represent  a higher  degree  of 
assurance.  However,  the  subsection  systems 
are  represented  by  only  seven  cases,  thus 
limiting  the  quantitative  base  of  our  statements. 
Further  investigation  on  the  relation  of  tribal 
size  to  number  of  sections  follows  in  the 
Discussion. 

In  the  plotting  of  median  points  for  tribal 
area  and  size  (Tables  1 and  2),  the  same 
pattern  emerges  in  each  case.  With  a corres- 
ponding increase  in  tribal  area  and  size,  one 
notes  an  increase  in  tribes  with  sections  and 
subsections.  However,  this  relationship  may 
not  hold  true  for  those  tribal  groups  where  the 
most  important  marriage  restriction  is  local 
group  exogamy.  Since  the  “o”  tribes  occupy 
the  environmentally  favorable  coastal  areas, 
the  hypothesis  as  stated  earlier  may  not  fully 


Table  1 Sections  and  Tribal  Areas 


X Square  Miles 

0-250 

250-500 

500-750 

750-1000 

1000-1250 

1250-1500 

1500-1750 

1750-2000 

2000-2250 

2250-2500 

2500-2750 

2750-3000 

3000-3250 

3250-3500 

3500-3750 

3750-4000 

4000-4250 

4250-4500 

4500-4750 

4750-5000 

5000-5250 

5250-5500 

5500-5750 

5750-6000 

6000-6250 

6250-6500 

6500-6570 

6750-7000 

7000-7250 

7250-7500 

7500-7570 

7750-8000 

8000-8250 

8250-8500 

8500-8750 

8750-900° 

9000-9250 
9250-9500 
9700-9750 
9750-10000 
10000-10250 
1 0250- 1 0500 
10500-10750 
1 0750- 1 1000 
1 1000-1 1250 
1 1250-1 1500 
1 1 500-1 1750 
1 1750-12000 
1 2000-over 


0248  Total 

1 1 

1 m 1 


lm  1 


3m  3 

1 1 


1 


1 


1 


2 


2 


Totals  2585  20 


m = Median 


1 92  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


Table  2 

Sections  and  Tribal  Size 

Population 

per  Tribe 

0 

248 

Total 

50-100 

2 1 ? 

3 

1 00- 1 50 

4 

3 

7 

1 50-200 

2 

2 

4 

200-250 

■ 

4 2 

7 

250-300 

im 

14m  2 

■7 

300-350 

1 

2 

3 

350-400 

2 

2 

400-450 

1 

2 1 

4 

450-500 

1 

I 

500-550 

1 

■ 3 

5 

550-600 

1 m 

I 

600-650 

1 

2 

3 

650-700 

700-750 

1 

I 

750-800 

1 

I 

800-850 

1 

1 

2 

850-900 

2 

2 

900-950 

1 

1 

2 

950- 1 000 

1 

I 

1000-1050 

1 1 

2 

1050-1 100 

1 1 00- 1 1 50 

im 

I 

1 1 50- 1 200 

1200-1250 

1 

I 

1250-1300 

■ 

I 

1300-1350 

■350-1400 

1 

I 

1400-1450 

1 

I 

■450-1500 

■500-1550 

1 

I 

■550-' 600 

1 600- 1 700 

1 

I 

1 700- 1 800 
1 800- 1 900 
1 900-2000 

2000-2 1 00 

1 

I 

Totals 

■5 

30  24  7 

76 

m = Median 

explain  this  type.  As  is  expected,  the  correla- 
tion between  section  systems  and  population 
density  also  patterns  in  the  same  direction  as 
the  two  previous  cases. 

Figure  i presents  the  spatial  distribution  of 
section  systems  in  aboriginal  Australia.  Both 
Davidson’s  (1928a)  and  Radcliffe-Brown’s 
(1930)  maps  are  basically  similar,  yet  in  a few 


Table  3 

Sections  and  Tribal  Density 

i person  per 

“ X ” sq.  mi. 

0248 

Total 

O-l 

I 

1 

1-2 

3 

3 

2-3 

i 2m 

3 

3-4 

im  1 

2 

4-5 

1 

1 

5-6 

2 

2 

6-7 

7-8 

im 

1 

8-9 

9-10 

1 

1 

IO-I2 

1 

1 

12-14 

1 

1 

14-16 

16-18 

1 

1 

18-20 

20-25 

1 

1 

25-30 

30-35 

1 

1 

35-40 

1 

1 

40-45 

im 

1 

45-50 

50-60 

60-70 

1 

1 

70-80 

1 

1 

80-90 

■ 

1 

90-100 

Totals 

2895 

24 

m = Median 


particulars  there  are  notable  differences.  David- 
son’s information  on  the  Kimberleys  and  Arn- 
hem Land  was  practically  nil,  while  Radcliffe- 
Brown  had  access  to  the  most  recent  field  work 
of  Elkin,  Hart,  Stanner,  and  Warner.  Further- 
more, Davidson  did  not  distinguish  between 
marriage  and  descent  functions  of  the  section 
system,  a distinction  which  Radcliffe-Brown 
fully  utilized.  However,  Radcliffe-Brown  de- 
signated the  Murngin  as  having  a subsection 
system,  yet  Warner  (1937)  noted  that  although 
Murngin  descent  is  based  on  an  eight-subsec- 
tion system,  their  marriage  restrictions  are  on 
a four-section  basis.  Both  authorities  made 
systematic  errors  in  certain  localities  such  as 
the  Cairns  rain  forest  of  coastal  Queensland. 
For  this  area,  Davidson  and  Radcliffe-Brown 
interpreted  the  tribal  social  organization  as 


Figure  i . Geographic  Distribution  of  Section  Systems  in  Aboriginal 
Australia.  Upper:  after  Davidson;  lower:  after  Radcliffe-Brown. 


1 94  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

possessing  section  marriage  restrictions;  how- 
ever, Tindale  and  Birdsell  (1941,  p.  6)  noted 
that  the  Cairns  people  had  only  moiety  restric- 
tions on  the  coast  and  section  systems  in  the 
interior.  A more  recent  map  and  discussion  on 
the  distribution  of  section  systems  is  available 
in  Berndt  and  Berndt’s  (1964,  pp.  53-60)  new 
volume  on  the  Australian  aborigines. 

From  the  data  in  Tables  1,  2,  and  3,  the 
following  conclusions  may  be  tentatively 
stated : 

1 . Those  tribes  characterized  by  subsections 
possess  the  largest  tribal  areas  and  sizes,  and 
the  lowest  population  densities. 

2.  Following  the  first  point,  as  the  number 
of  sections  decrease  from  eight  to  four  to  two, 
tribal  areas  and  sizes  also  decrease  and  popula- 
tion density  goes  up. 

3.  Since  environmental  factors  strongly  in- 
fluence the  population  parameter,  and  since 
the  latter  is  related  to  the  number  of  sections 
into  which  a tribe  is  divided,  it  may  be  tenta- 
tively concluded  that  an  indirect  relation  exists 
between  sections,  population,  and  environ- 
ment. The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  devoted 
to  the  investigation  of  the  processes  by  which 
section  systems  are  regulated  by  population 
size. 


Discussion 

In  this  section,  population  size  is  explored  in 
terms  of  its  functions  and  limits  on  the  “ideal” 
operation  of  marriage  sections.  A population 
pyramid  (Fig.  2)  is  utilized  in  analyzing  the 
interrelationships  between  population  size  and 
marital  unions.  The  pyramid  is  based  on 
generalized  hunting  and  gathering  groups, 
and  on  a few  assumptions  to  be  spelled  out. 

Figure  2 shows  the  age  and  sex  breakdown  of 
a tribe  numbering  100  individuals.  First,  a 
balanced  sex  ratio  for  each  five-year  interval 
is  assumed,  although  specific  ethnographic 
cases  may  not  verify  this  assumption  for  all  age 
levels.  Second,  population  equilibrium  is  as- 
sumed. In  a population  where  equilibrium 
with  the  carrying  capacity  is  stabilized,  each 
adult  must  reproduce  himself,  consequently  a 
married  couple  must  replace  themselves  with 
two  offspring  who  reach  reproductive  age. 


Populations  control  mechanisms  include 
natural  infant  and  child  mortality,  abortion, 
infanticide,  birth  spacing  through  late  wean- 
ing, and  so  forth.  For  example,  infanticide 
rates  among  aboriginal  Australians  may  have 
been  as  high  as  30  per  cent  (Birdsell,  1958). 

The  age  of  first  marriage  amohg  Australian 
males  varies  from  the  early  twenties  to  the 
mid-thirties,  and  the  average  is  between  the 
ages  of  25  to  30.  Marriage  age  for  females 
varies  from  eigh't  to  ten  years  among  the 
Walbiri  and  some  Arnhem  Land  groups  to 
the  late  teens  among  the  Pitjandjara.  Although 
age  of  females  at  marriage  in  many  groups  is 
relatively  early,  menarche  and  conception 
usually  occur  later.  A young  female  may  not 
effectively  reproduce  until  15  or  16,  and  only 
after  the  birth  of  her  first  offspring  will  her 
economic  role  become  important.  Thus,  fe- 
males may  become  “effective”  marital  part- 
ners— for  economic  and  reproductive  purposes 
— at  about  15  or  16  years  of  age.  For  con- 
venience, an  overall  age  bracket  in  which 
practically  all  females  would  be  married  is 
15-19,  though  one  must  recognize  earlier 
marriage  in  some  groups. 

If  all  able  males  over  25  are  of  marriageable 
age,  then  a total  of  thirteen  males  in  a popula- 
tion of  100  may  take  a spouse  at  any  one 
time.  Any  women  over  1 5 may  acquire  a 
spouse  at  any  particular  time,  thus  resulting  in 
24  eligible  females.  Older  widows  are  often 
given  to  younger  men  as  first  spouses  and  elder 
males  often  have  primary  access  to  younger 
females  (Rose,  Chapter  21,  this  volume). 

To  balance  the  model  with  ethnographic 
fact,  three  alternative  stipulations  concerning 
marriage  are  set  forth.  The  first  stipulation  is 
that  a male  marries  only  females  younger  than 
himself  though  all  males  over  40  have  access 
to  all  eligible  females.  This  results  in  an  aver- 
age of  seventeen  eligible  females  at  any  one 
time.  The  second  stipulation,  that  males  marry 
females  younger  and  up  to  five  years  older, 
results  in  19.2  (=  19)  eligible  females.  The 
third  stipulation  is  males  marry  females 
younger  and  up  to  ten  years  older.  This  yields 
20.8  (=21)  eligible  females  at  any  one  time 
in  a population  of  100.  The  computations  for 
assessing  eligible  females  are  in  Table  4. 

Of  the  three  stipulations,  the  third  one  is 
closest  to  ethnographic  reality.  While  older 


Yengoyan  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections  195 


Age  No.  of 

■ _ 1 1 • • 


Interval  Individuals 

55-60 

2 

50-54 

2 

4549 

2 

4044 

2 

35  39 

4 

30-34 

6 

25-29 

8 

20-24 

10 

15-19 

12 

10-14 

14 

5-  9 

16 

1 

0 

22 

100 


shaded  areas  represent 
marriageable  individuals 


Stipulations 


number  1 
4x24  = 96 
2x  18  = 36 
3x  15  =45 
4x  II  =44 


13  =T2T 
av.^r  170 


number  2 
4x  24=96 
2x 20=40 
3x  18=54 
4x  15=  60 


13  = 250 

av.  §50  _ ,q  p 
13 


number  3 
4x  24=  96 
2x  21  = 42 
3x  20=  60 


4x  18=  7? 
17“^  270 

aV‘ 13  = 208 


Figure  2.  Population  Pyramid  for  a Hypothetical  Tribe  Numbering  ioo. 


males  control  the  younger  women,  the  younger 
males  are  often  provided  widows  as  their  first 
spouse.  In  fact,  an  estimate  such  as  the  third 
stipulation  is  still  conservative  (see  Goodale, 
1962;  Meggitt,  1965;  Rose,  1960b).  The  age 
difference  for  the  first  marriage  of  either  sex 
to  their  first  spouse  is  quite  marked. 

The  interrelationship  between  the  popula- 
tion pyramid  and  different  marriage  restric- 
tions is  found  in  Table  4.  Assuming  a hypo- 
thetical number  of  ten  local  groups  and  an 
ideal  situation  where  each  group  has  equal 
representation  as  regards  females,  a local  group 


would  then  have  2.1  eligible  females  per  male. 
With  only  local  group  exogamy  (the  “o”  con- 
dition), a male  has  a total  18.9  possible  mates. 
When  moiety  restrictions  are  imposed  the  num- 
ber of  potential  mates,  and  possibly  potential 
competitors,  is  reduced  by  one-half.  Subse- 
quently, with  section  marriage  restrictions,  the 
number  of  eligible  females  is  reduced  to  one- 
fourth  of  the  “o”  condition,  and  with  sub- 
section marriage  to  one-eighth.  Thus,  with  a 
tribal  size  of  100  and  the  existence  of  subsec- 
tions, a male  would  ideally  have  only  2.36 
possible  marriage  mates. 


i g6  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 


Table  4 Number  of  Possible  Mates  under  Four  Sets  of 
Marriage  Restrictions 


1.  Local  Group  Exogamy  (“o”) 


2.1 

2.1 

2.1 

2.1 

2.1 

18.9  possible 

2.1 

2.1 

2.1 

2.1 

ego 

mates 

2.  Moiety  Restrictions  (“2”) 

1.05  1.05  1.05 

1.05 

1.05 

9.45  possible 

1.05  1.05  1.05 

1.05 

ego 

mates 

3.  Section  Restrictions  (“4”) 

.525  .525  .525 

■525 

•525 

4.725  possible 

•525  525  -525 

•525 

ego 

mates 

4.  Subsection  Restrictions  (“8”) 

.2625 

.2625  .2625  .2625 

.2625 

2.3625  possible 

.2625 

.2625  .2625  .2625 

ego 

mates 

The  correlation  between  number  of  eligible 
mates  and  population  size  is  presented  in 
Figure  3.  Extrapolating  from  the  tribal  model 
of  100  to  larger,  more  realistic  population 
sizes,  allows  us  to  ascertain  the  number  of 
eligible  mates  under  varying  tribal  sizes  and 
section  restrictions.  A tribe  of  500  people  with 
subsection  marriage  rules  yields  an  ideal  figure 
of  nearly  twelve  eligible  females  per  male  at 
any  one  time. 

When  the  results  of  the  model  are  compared 
with  the  empirical  data  in  Table  2,  a few  in- 
teresting observations  are  noted.  First,  is  the 
occurrence  of  a tribe  of  50-100  individuals 
with  a subsection  system  (listed  in  Table  2 as 
“ ?”).  The  reality  of  this  case  is  doubted  since 
the  tribe  was  occupying  approximately  10,500 
square  miles  thus  resulting  in  an  extremely  low 
population  density  of  one  person  per  100-200 
square  miles.  A small  population  with  low 
densities  operating  on  a set  of  highly  selective 
marriage  restrictions  would  be  most  impractical. 


Also,  the  presence  of  ideally  two  eligible  mates 
would  be  improbable  since  local  groups  occupy 
large  areas  with  wide  intervening  distances. 

From  Table  2,  the  medians  for  tribes  with 
moiety,  section,  and  subsection  restrictions  are 
250~3°°>  550-600,  and  1,100-1,150.  When  the 
median  figures  are  plotted  on  Figure  3,  the 
result  is  that  in  each  case  a figure  of  25-27 
eligible  mates  per  male  is  derived.  With  the 
existence  of  25  eligible  mates  and  only  moiety 
restrictions,  an  ideal  tribal  size  figure  is  ap- 
proximately 262  which  falls  between  the 
median  range  of  250  to  300.  Twenty-five 
eligible  mates  in  a section  system  yields  a size 
of  530  while  the  empirically  derived  median 
is  550  to  600.  With  subsections  and  25  eligible 
mates,  an  ideal  tribal  size  of  1,070  is  postulated. 
Once  again,  the  median  of  1,100-1,150  is  re- 
markably close  to  the  predicted  figure  from  the 
model. 

If  the  existence  of  25  eligible  mates  rep- 
resents an  operational  number,  then  it  is 


Yengoyan  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections 


97 


Figure  3.  Relationship  between  Population  Size  and  the  Number  of  Eligible  Mates. 


suggested  that  those  populations  with  sections 
and  subsections  whose  tribal  sizes  are  signifi- 
cantly lower  than  the  predicted  range  could  not 
statistically  confirm  ideal  marriage  rules.  Three 
cases  may  be  briefly  discussed  to  illustrate  this 
point.  Walbiri  population  size  in  1954  was 
approximately  1,400  (Meggitt,  1962,  p.  31),  a 
figure  well  above  the  predicted  range  of  1 ,070 
for  tribes  with  subsections.  As  might  be  ex- 
pected, preferred  unions  with  matrilateral 
second  cross-cousins  occurred  in  91.6  per  cent 
(566/617)  of  all  cases  (Meggitt,  1962,  p.  86) 
and  thus  confirm  the  stated  marriage  rule.  At 


Borroloola  near  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  Reay 
(1962)  discussed  subsections  and  semimoieties 
among  eight  small  tribal  groups  of  which  the 
Garawa  and  the  Anyula  are  the  largest.  The 
total  population  of  these  groups  in  1 958-59 
was  268,  a figure  well  below  the  predicted 
range  of  1 ,070.  Consequently,  out  of  88  unions 
only  51  (57.95  per  cent)  marriages  were  regu- 
lar. Furthermore,  the  natives  were  fully  con- 
scious that  appropriate  subsection  partners 
were  not  always  available  and  that  highly  fre- 
quent irregular  unions  did  not  follow  the  ideal 
marriage  pattern  (Reay,  1962,  pp.  109- no). 


1 98  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

Among  the  Lunga,  Djaru,  Kunian,  Punaba, 
and  Wolmeri  of  the  Kimberleys,  Kaberry 
(1939,  P-  11  5)  noted  a range  of  47.2  per  cent 
to  73. 1 per  cent  for  all  regular  marriages. 
However,  the  tribal  population  of  these  groups 
is  not  listed,  though  detribalization  was  in 
process. 

It  may  be  concluded  that  population  size 
sets  definite  limitations  on  the  operation  of 
section  systems.  Thus  when  tribal  size  signifi- 
cantly decreases  from  the  predicted  range, 
certain  compensating  factors  such  as  increasing 
intertribal  and  theft  unions  with  consequent 
destructive  conflicts,  become  prominent.  How- 
ever, it  must  recognized  that  subsection  systems 
in  all  probability  have  never  operated  entirely 
according  to  the  ideal  pattern. 

Intertribal  exchanges,  theft  unions,  and 
wrong  and  alternative  marriages  may  occur  as 
adaptive  factors  when  ideal  marriage  partners 
are  infrequent  through  decreasing  tribal  size 
and  other  factors.  However,  all  intertribal 
marriages  can  not  be  attributed  to  the  un- 
availability of  designated  mates.  Tribes  such 
as  the  Pitjandjara  and  Ngadadjara  regard 
intertribal  marriages  as  usual  events  which  fit 
into  existing  marriage  patterns  (Tindale,  1953, 
P-  >73)- 

Marriages  with  alternative  and  prohibited 
mates  vary  in  frequency  and  may  be  utilized 
as  an  index  of  population  decline.  The  attitude 
towards  marriages  of  this  type  differs  from 
group  to  group,  and  in  some  cases,  a wrong 
marriage  is  “corrected”  after  the  union  through 
partial  realignment  of  kinship  relations  and 
terminology. 

Another  form  of  adjustment  to  population 
size  is  the  fusion  of  two  or  more  groups  whose 
tribal  identities  are  diminishing.  In  the  coastal 
areas  of  the  Kimberleys,  one  finds  small  tribes 
who  socially  recognize  the  acquiring  of  mar- 
riage mates  from  adjacent  populations. 

Conclusions 

Population  size  is  a critical  factor  in  the  ideal 
operation  of  section  systems.  When  tribal  num- 
bers significantly  decrease  and  the  number  of 
eligible  mates  is  few  and  spatially  dispersed, 
certain  adaptive  changes  may  arise  to  provide 
marriage  mates.  Since  population  size  is  regu- 


lated by  ecological  factors,  the  environmental 
influences  on  marriage  patterns  are  important 
variables,  though  indirect.  Furthermore,  tribal 
units  with  exceedingly  small  and  fragmented 
populations  and  subsections  have  been  re- 
corded, but  statistically  it  is  highly  improbable 
that  these  groups  could  conform  to  stated 
marriage  rules. 

Many  tribes  with  subsections  occupy  vast 
areas  in  the  central  arid  regions  of  the  conti- 
nent. As  Elkin  has  repeatedly  noted,  subsec- 
tion groupings  are  simplified  combinations  of 
kin  relations,  and  class  terms  are  employed 
primarily  among  individuals  and  groups  who 
are  not  in  close  association  and  whose  inter- 
action with  one  another  is  sporadic.  Among  the 
Pitjandjara  and  the  Jankuntjatara  for  example, 
section  terms  are  used  in  referring  to  indivi- 
duals whose  kin  relationships  are  either  ambi- 
guous or  non-existent.  Among  immediate  and 
genealogically  “close”  kinsmen,  kin  terms  are 
always  employed.  Strehlow  also  noted  similar 
use  of  class  terms  among  the  Aranda  when  he 
stated : 

Since  the  use  of  these  kinship  terms  accurately 
indicated  the  social  obligations  that  existed  be- 
tween persons  who  use  them  toward  each  other, 
the  class-names  or  anbanerintja  were  of  prime  im- 
portance when  first  contacts  were  being  es- 
tablished between  members  of  a local  group  and 
new  arrivals  who  had  come  as  guests,  also  between 
men  belonging  to  a number  of  different  local 
groups  who  had  assembled  on  one  ground  for  a 
ceremonial  gathering  (1965,  p.  135). 

Service’s  analysis  of  egocentric  and  sociocen- 
tric  relationship  terms  in  Australia  concludes 
with  the  following  statement: 

Where  meetings  are  less  frequent  and  the 
people  are  relative  strangers  to  each  other,  the 
need  for  sociocentric  terminology  is  greater — a 
stimulus  is  present.  This  would  mean  that  in 
inland  Australia  social  conditions  exist  which 
make  the  naming  of  the  sections  more  likely  there 
than  in  more  productive  areas  (i960,  p.  431). 

One  of  the  characteristics  of  section  systems 
is  the  extension  of  section  terms  to  distant  kins- 
men and  non-kinsmen,  who  may  occupy  adja- 
cent and  distant  areas  of  exploitation.  The 


Yengoyan  Demographic  and  Ecological  Influences  on  Aboriginal  Australian  Marriage  Sections 


expansion  of  section  terms  not  only  combines 
spatially  distant  groups  into  meaningful  units 
for  marriage  and  ceremonial  functions,  but 
also  permits  reciprocal  movements  of  related 
groups  into  larger  territorial  domains.  For  the 
Aranda,  Fry  (1934,  p.  20)  stated  that  “mar- 
riage with  a distant  kin  not  only  minimizes  the 
danger  of  infringing  the  tabu  on  parents-in- 
law,  but  also  gives  a certain  right  of  entry  to 
other  districts  in  addition  to  that  of  the 
mother.” 

Since  sections  and  subsections  commonly 
occur  in  tribal  units  with  large  areas,  the 
degree  of  spatial  distribution  of  one’s  relations 
is  greater  than  in  small  tribal  areas.  This  net- 
work of  related  individuals  and  groups  permits 
local  groups  to  move  into  different  areas  of 
exploitation,  especially  during  severe  droughts 
and  periods  of  economic  hardship.  The  exten- 
sion of  kin  relations  via  section  groupings  thus 
“insures”  for  each  local  group  the  ability  of 
movement  into  adjacent  areas,  as  well  as  re- 
ducing the  possibility  of  non-tribal  members 
crossing  traditional  boundaries.3 

It  is  thus  suggested  that  the  ability  of  local 
populations  to  survive  under  rigorous  environ- 
mental conditions  requires  a certain  flexibility 
in  local  organization  which  allows  for  maxi- 
mum mobility  of  exploiting  groups,  and  a 
means  of  linking  vast  numbers  of  individuals 

3.  It  should  not  be  assumed  that  all  non-tribal  mem- 
bers were  excluded  from  crossing  tribal  boundaries. 
Section  and  subsection  terms  in  central  Australia  typi- 
cally run  across  tribal  areas,  thus  permitting  local  groups 
access  to  the  territory  of  neighboring  tribes.  However 
ceremonial  and  totemic  factors  might  have  partially 
limited  intertribal  mobility. 


199 

and  groups  through  sections  and  subsections 
into  a network  which  permits  small  mobile 
units  to  spatially  expand  and  contract  under 
varying  environmental  conditions.  Conse- 
quently, one  of  the  functions  of  sections  and 
subsections  may  have  been  an  economic  factor 
in  allowing  populations  to  “insure”  a vast 
territorial  domain  from  non-tribal  groups,  as 
well  as  “insuring”  each  local  group’s  future 
against  economic  hardship  by  permitting  ac- 
cess into  more  favorable  environments.  On  the 
coastal  regions  of  Australia,  subsections  were 
not  necessary,  but  in  the  central  arid  areas, 
sections  and  subsections  linked  spatially  and 
socially  distant  groups  together  for  mutual 
interaction  and  mobility.  A somewhat  analo- 
gous situation  is  reported  by  Sahlins  (1958,  p. 
236)  for  the  Polynesian  atolls.  The  main  prob- 
lem on  the  atolls  is  the  survival  of  a dense 
population  in  an  area  of  sporadic  or  limited 
surplus  production.  Since  economic  specializa- 
tion can  not  be  sustained,  every  individual  is 
interconnected  by  some  alignment  principle — 
descent,  age  grades,  residence — to  every  other 
type  of  socioeconomic  group.  Thus,  everyone 
shares  in  the  distribution  and  consumption  of 
what  is  produced.  Sahlins  (1958,  p.  245)  postu- 
lates that  the  development  of  a number  of 
interlocking  social  groups,  each  dedicated  to 
exploitation  of  different  resources,  may  be  ex- 
pected on  atolls  as  adaptations  to  selective 
pressures  limiting  surplus  production.  In  abori- 
ginal Australia,  one  may  regard  the  inter- 
locking of  kinsmen  through  section  and  sub- 
section groupings  as  allowing  for  greater  inter- 
action and  mobility  over  exploitable  lands  and 
thus  “insuring”  utilizable  resources. 


21 


Australian  Marriage, 

Land-Owning  Groups,  and  Initiations 


FREDERICK  G.  G.  ROSE 


Introduction 

At  the  symposium  on  Man  the  Hunter  we  dis- 
cussed the  Australian  land-owning  groups  and 
marriage  arrangements.  Except  indirectly, 
initiation  found  no  place  in  the  discussion,  let 
alone  its  relevance  to  the  relations  between 
social  groups,  marriage,  and  resource  use.  The 
purpose  of  the  present  contribution  is  to  show 
that  marriage,  initiation,  and  the  relations 
between  the  land-owning  groups  are  mutually 
interdependent  and  that  an  appreciation  of 
the  reciprocal  relations  between  them  takes 
one  a considerable  way  to  understanding  the 
organization  of  aboriginal  society  as  a whole. 

Marriage  and  the 
Land-Owning  Group 

Because  our  views  are  conditioned  by  our  own 
experience,  we  tend  to  think  of  marriage  ar- 
rangements among,  for  instance,  the  Australian 
aborigines  as  essentially  a means  of  regulating 
biological  relations  between  men  and  women 
necessary  for  the  propagation  of  the  species. 
This  notion  has  little  relevance  to  the  Aus- 
tralian aborigines  because  they  do  not  or  did 
not  know  the  connection  between  sexual  rela- 
tions and  the  birth  of  children.  It  is  not  in- 


tended to  argue  here  for  or  against  the  evidence 
on  the  aborigines’  ignorance  of  the  facts  of  life 
reported  by  various  field  workers.  It  is  merely 
intended  to  cite  a piece  of  indirect  evidence  in 
support  of  this  alleged  ignorance  of  the 
aborigines. 

An  ever-recurring  theme  of  cult  life  and  of 
art  throughout  Australia,  north,  central,  and 
south,  is  the  fertility  of  nature  and  of  man.  In 
the  north  of  Australia,  however,  probably 
through  the  contact  with  the  Indonesians,  and 
possibly  other  Asians  before  them,  the  abori- 
gines learned  of  the  connection  between  the 
birth  of  children  and  sexual  intercourse,  al- 
though they  retained  in  the  background  as  a 
kind  of  theology  the  usual  Australian  concept 
of  spirit  children.  Anyone  who  compares  the 
fertility  cult  life  and  concepts  of  the  north  with 
those  of  the  center  and  the  south  will  immedi- 
ately be  struck  with  the  erotic  form  the  cults 
and  beliefs  of  the  north  have  taken.  A pre- 
supposition to  the  development  of  the  erotic 
in  the  fertility  beliefs  is  clearly  a knowledge  of 
the  significance  of  the  sexual  act  for  the  birth 
of  children.  We  are  convinced  that  this  know- 
ledge was  lacking  in  the  south  and  center  and 
until  a few  centuries  ago  was  probably  also 
lacking  in  the  north. 

For  the  aborigines,  therefore,  a woman  was 
a being  who  throughout  the  period  of  her  life 


200 


Rose  Australian  Marriage,  Land-Owning  Groups,  and  Initiations 


from  puberty  to  the  menopause  regularly  pro- 
duced children,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  abori- 
gines the  man  with  whom  she  was  living  had 
no  relevance  to  the  biological  facts.  A woman 
who  did  not  produce  children  was  an  anomaly 
in  the  aborigines’  scheme  of  things. 

The  relation  between  the  man  and  the  wo- 
man in  marriage,  from  the  viewpoint  of  abori- 
ginal society,  was  essentially  a reciprocal 
economic  one,  the  man  primarily  providing 
the  meat  and  the  woman  the  vegetable  food- 
stuffs for  themselves  and  her  children. 

If  this  economic  element  is  the  essential  one 
in  aboriginal  marriage,  to  understand  its 
dynamics  it  is  necessary  to  consider  two  other 
aspects  of  their  life  which  reciprocally  influence 
one  another  and,  in  their  different  ways,  have 
a bearing  on  marriage.  These  two  aspects  or 
institutions  are,  first,  the  relationships  between 
the  land-owning  (i.e.,  the  political)  groups  or 
clans  and,  second,  the  initiation  of  the  males: 
both  are  the  obverse  of  the  coin  to  the  marriage 
arrangements  or,  perhaps  better  expressed,  the 
other  two  sides  of  the  triangle. 

A generation  ago  it  was  considered  almost 
as  axiomatic  that  marriage  arrangements  were 
determined  by  kinship  relationships,  perhaps 
reinforced — in  a somewhat  obscure  way — by 
the  so-called  “marriage  classes,”  where  these 
existed.  Thus  we  were  told  that  the  Aranda- 
type  of  kinship  system  was  the  most  prevalent 
in  Australia,  in  which  a man  married  his 
mother’s  mother’s  brother’s  daughter’s  daugh- 
ter (who  at  the  same  time  was  the  other  three 
second  cousins),  and  if  he  married  anyone  else, 
then  it  was  considered  an  “exceptional”  mar- 
riage. This  all  made  for  excellent  “modeling” 
and  kinship  algebra  but  got  us  little  nearer  to 
understanding  why  aboriginal  society  was 
integrated  the  way  it  was. 

However,  the  main  determinant  of  aboriginal 
marriage  is  not  the  kinship  system  or  the 
“marriage  classes.”  Rather,  each  individual 
marriage  is  determined  ultimately  by  the  reci- 
procal rights  and  obligations  existing  between 
the  actual  political  land-owning  groups  and  to 
a less  extent  the  reciprocal  rights  and  obliga- 
tions between  members  of  these  different  land- 
owning groups.  These  reciprocal  rights  and 
obligations  aggregate  into  an  extraordinarily 
complicated  network  linking  groups  and  indi- 
viduals throughout  the  society. 


201 

The  kinship  terminology — at  least  as  far  as 
the  Australian  aborigines  are  concerned  and 
whatever  might  be  true  of  other  societies — is 
primarily  an  expression  of  these  rights  and 
obligations  between  individuals  as  members  of 
groups, and  does  not  express  blood  relationship 
(real  or  Active)  which  we  social  anthropologists 
in  our  superior  wisdom  and  in  our  categories 
of  thought  have  arbitrarily  imposed  on 
it. 

What  is  more,  the  network  of  which  we  have 
spoken  is  continually  changing  in  the  temporal 
dimension.  The  lasting  service  of  Hart  and 
Pilling  (i960)  is  that  they  were  able  to  show 
just  how  complicated  this  network  was,  and 
what  factors  ultimately  determine  a marriage. 

It  is,  of  course,  much  simpler  to  determine 
the  kinship  structure  of  an  aboriginal  society 
than  to  determine  what  are  the  economic, 
diplomatic,  political  (or  call  them  what  one 
will)  relations  between  groups  and  individuals. 
As  far  as  we  know,  Hart  and  Pilling’s  worl^  is, 
of  its  kind,  unique,  while  there  are  scores  of 
accounts  of  Australian  kinship  systems.  As  a 
consequence  it  has  become  almost  a dogma 
that  kinship  was  the  ultimate  determinant  of 
marriage. 

If  it  is  ultimately  the  economic  relations  be- 
tween land-owning  groups  that  determine  what 
marriages  take  place,  how  are  these  relations 
manifested  ? Here  again  we  have  to  clear  away 
another  dogma.  The  land-owning  group  in  the 
drier,  near-desert  areas  (perhaps  it  would  be 
better  to  speak  of  the  waterhole-owning  group) 
is  an  abstraction,  for  it  never  comes  together 
except,  almost  incidentally,  when  very  large 
numbers  of  aborigines  meet.  Although  an  ab- 
straction in  the  sense  mentioned,  it  is  nonethe- 
less real.  In  Australia  it  is  the  fundamental 
political  unit,  deriving  its  power  from  the  com- 
mon ownership  of  the  land1  (or  more  exactly 
the  game  that  lives  on  it,  and  the  vegetable 
foods  which  grow  in  or  on  it)  which  is  the 
most  important  means  of  production.  It  was 
early  recognized  that  the  land-owning  group 
was  exogamous  and  that  the  men  of  the  group 
received  their  wives  from  other  groups  and,  in 

1.  Chrustov  (1959)  has  discussed  the  evidence  for  and 
against  the  common  ownership  of  land  in  Australia.  He 
puts  a cogent  case  for  land  ownership  in  Australia  being 
in  common. 


202  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

their  turn,  the  women  born  into  a land-owning 
group  went  to  other  groups  at  marriage.  How- 
ever, it  was  assumed  that  the  men  of  a land- 
owning group  worked  together  as  a foraging 
group,  horde,  or  band  on  their  own  land, 
except  on  rare  occasions  when  they  visited 
other  land-owning  groups.  In  other  words,  we 
had  a virtual  identification  of  the  foraging 
group  with  the  land-owning  group.2  This  is  an 
incorrect  conception  and  one  that  can  easily 
be  shown  to  be  incorrect  when  the  members 
of  foraging  groups  are  classified  according  to 
membership  in  land-owing  groups  (Hiatt, 
1962,  Chapter  10  and  18,  this  volume).  The 
foraging  group  is  an  extremely  variable  entity 
not  only  in  respect  to  size  but  also  in  respect 
to  land-owning  group  membership. 

It  is  variable  in  respect  to  size  mainly  be- 
cause the  availability  of  food  in  any  area  is 
extremely  changeable,  not  only  between  sea- 
sons but  also  from  year  to  year.  At  a particular 
time  of  year,  when  food  resources  are  scattered, 
the  foraging  group  breaks  down  even  to  the 
individual  family;  at  other  times,  when  food  is 
abundant  in  a small  area,  the  groups  come 
together  to  form  aggregations  of  two  hundred 
or  more  aborigines  at  a single  camp.  These 
large  groups  persist  sometimes  for  weeks  or 
even  months  at  a time  (Meggitt,  1962; 
Strehlow,  1967).  Abundant  food  in  a limited 
area  was  clearly  a prerequisite  for  the  carrying 
out  of  large-scale  initiation  and  increase 
rituals. 

The  foraging  group  is  variable  in  respect  to 
male  membership  of  land-owning  groups  be- 
cause, given  low  population  density,  an  estate 
belonging  to  a particular  land-owning  group 
simply  cannot  provide  continuously  for  twelve 
months  of  the  year,  year  in  and  year  out, 
sufficient  foodstuffs  for  its  members.  The  land 
of  one  group  may  provide  an  abundance  of 
food  during  the  spring,  for  example,  while 
another  may  provide  an  abundance  of  food 
during  the  winter.  This  leads  to  reciprocity 
between  the  land-owning  groups.  Inevitably, 
there  are  seasonal  movements  of  population 
from  one  area  to  another.  The  reason  for  this 
is  ecological  and  is  determined  essentially  by 
distribution  of  resources. 

A man  can  hunt  on  his  own  land.  He  also 
has  certain  rights  to  hunt  on  the  group-land 
of  his  mother  and  of  his  wife,  but  in  order  to 


hunt  on  the  land  of  other  land-owning  groups, 
he  has  to  be  invited  or  to  obtain  permission.3 
It  is  the  sum  of  the  obligations  a man  incurs  by 
being  allowed  to  hunt  on  another  group’s 
territory,  and  the  rights  that  he  possesses  to 
allow  men  of  other  groups  to  hunt  on  his 
territory,  that  constitutes  the  network  of  obli- 
gations and  rights  mentioned  earlier  as  being 
the  essential  factors  in  determining  marriage 
arrangements.  The  land-owning  group  does 
not,  in  fact  cannot,  live  by  itself;  it  usually  has 
some  kind  of  economic,  political,  or  social 
relationship  with  some  ten  to  fifteen  other  land- 
owning groups.  This  would  appear  to  be  the 
mean  radius,  under  Australian  hunting-collect- 
ing nomadism,  that  a man  can  extend  his  con- 
tacts. Because  of  the  social  contacts  existing 
within  this  radius,  a certain  language  and  cul- 
tural homogeneity  develops,  and  the  sum  total 
of  land-owning  groups  existing  within  this 
radius  is  often  spoken  of  as  a “tribe,”  although 
there  is  in  Australia  no  political  organization 
at  a “tribal”  level.  The  “tribe”  numbers  some 
400  or  so  aborigines  on  the  basis  of  a mean 


2.  Another  reason  for  erroneously  identifying  the 
males  of  the  land-owning  group  (clan)  and  their  wives 
and  children  with  the  foraging  group  (horde  or  band)  is 
that  although  the  size  of  the  land-owning  group  varies 
greatly  between  “tribes,”  and  as  well  as  within  “tribes,” 
the  normal  size  (say  thirty  men,  women,  and  children)  is 
not  greatly  different  from  the  size  of  the  normal  foraging 
group,  although,  as  noted  this  also  varies  greatly.  Some 
examples  of  the  constitution  of  foraging  groups  for  Groote 
Eylandt  in  1941  are  recorded  (Rose,  1960b,  pp.  77  and 
81).  Tindale  (1925,  pp.  74  and  94)  reproduces  photo- 
graphs of  groups  of  male  aborigines  taken  in  1922  and 
refers  to  them  as  men  of  particular  land-owning  groups. 
The  aborigines  in  the  photographs  were  identified  in 
1948  and  their  land-owning  group  affiliations  obtained 
(Rose,  1960b,  pp.  207-208).  Instead  of  belonging  in  each 
case  to  one  land-owning  group,  they  belonged  to  several. 

3.  The  question  of  being  invited  by  another  land-own- 
ing group  and  the  despatch  of  emissaries  for  this  purpose 
is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  older  literature.  Morgan 
in  the  old  classic  The  Life  and  Adventures  of  William 
Buckley  (Hobart,  1852),  mentions  on  several  occasions 
the  “diplomatic”  relations  between  the  land-owning 
groups.  Morgan’s  work  is  now  virtually  unobtainable 
and  a new  edition  in  German  translation  with  annota- 
tions has  recently  been  published  (Reim,  1964).  Little 
information  on  the  actual  relations  between  either  the 
land-owning  or  the  foraging  groups  has  been  obtained  by 
trained  ethnographers.  The  reason  for  this  has  been 
discussed  by  Barnes  (1963,  p.  200). 


Rose  Australian  Marriage,  Land-Owning  Groups,  and  Initiations 


membership  of  thirty  for  the  land-owning 
group.4 

One  often  reads  in  the  literature  of  exchange 
of  wives  between  individuals  or  between  groups. 
While  this  occurs,  of  course,  the  actual  exchange 
of  wives  is  only  one  manifestation  of  a much 
wider  reciprocity  between  land-owning  groups. 
However,  because  it  is  a phenomenon  that  can 
easily  be  observed — or  logically,  although  not 
necessarily  correctly,  deduced  from  observation 
(cf.  Rose,  1960b,  p.  1 19) — it  is  reported  as  if  it 
were  independent  of  the  wider  reciprocity. 

Sahlins’’  Original  Affluent  Society : A Comment 

At  this  point  a digression  will  be  made  to  follow 
a train  of  thought  stimulated  by  Marshall 
Sahlins’  “Notes  on  the  Original  Affluent 
Society”  (Chapter  9b,  this  volume).  If  Sahlins 
is  right  and  those  like  Tokarev  (1961,  p.  683) 
who  conceive  of  the  hunter-collectors  as  living 
continuously  on  the  borderline  of  starvation 
are  wrong,  why  are  the  Australian  aborigines 
so  preoccupied  with  the  fertility  of  man  and 
nature  ? There  seems  to  be  a contradiction  here. 
If  they  need  to  spend  only  three  or  four  hours 
a day  hunting  or  collecting,  there  is  obviously 
plenty  of  foodstuffs  available  and  increase 
rituals  for  kangaroos  (or  other  foodstuffs)  just 
do  not  make  sense.  Why  was  there  also  a pre- 
occupation with  human  fertility?  Were  the 
women  peculiarly  sterile? 

Quantitative  records  such  as  we  have  of 
remnants  of  tribes  on  the  fringes  of  civilization, 
where  the  aborigines  were  riddled  with  disease 
and  were  living  under  bad  sanitational  condi- 
tions and  with  inadequate  diet,  show  that  the 
women  were  indeed  peculiarly  sterile.  But  such 
detribalized  aborigines  were  in  the  process  of 
dying  out.  What  was  the  situation  under  tribal 
conditions  unaffected  by  the  deleterious  in- 
fluences of  civilization?  Were  the  women 

4.  See  note  2 on  the  size  of  the  land-owning  group. 
Likewise  the  size  of  the  “tribe”  shows  great  variations. 
The  Groote  Eylandt  people  were  a “tribe”  in  1941, 
numbering  between  300  and  350.  The  Pitjandjara 
originally  probably  numbered  over  a thousand. 

5.  On  Groote  Eylandt  the  introduction  of  antibiotics 
and  infant  care  by  missionaries  and  the  government 
during  the  later  years  of  the  war  and  following  has  led 
to  a marked  drop  in  the  infant  and  young  child  mor- 
tality rate,  with  the  result  that  a virtual  population 


203 

peculiarly  sterile  here,  so  that  it  was  necessary 
to  invoke  magical  or  religious  means  to  increase 
the  population  and  so  prevent  the  society  dy- 
ing out  ? Records  of  aboriginal  (or  other 
hunter-gatherers  for  that  matter)  birth  rates 
under  traditional  conditions  are  almost  non- 
existent. Although  the  birth  rate,  as  such,  is 
not  recorded,  the  writer’s  data  (1960b)  on  a 
tribe  that  was  still  living  under  traditional 
conditions  indicate  how  high  the  birth  rate 
must  have  been.  Far  from  being  peculiarly 
sterile,  the  women  were  quite  the  reverse.  If  a 
woman  lived  the  full  span  from  puberty  to  the 
menopause,  she  had  at  least  eighteen  children. 
Surely  this  stands  in  logical  contradiction  to 
the  aborigines’  apparent  obsession  with  human 
fertility?  One  might  expect  a greater  interest 
in  birth  control ! But  on  Groote  Eylandt,  where 
the  writer  worked,  there  was  no  birth  control 
and  little  infanticide  was  practiced. 

Sahlins  is,  nevertheless,  right  for  Groote 
Eylandt  subsistence:  for  the  greater  part  of 
their  time  they  only  needed  to  work  three 
or  four  hours  a day.  There  was  an  abundance 
of  meat  and  an  abundance  of  vegetable 
foodstuffs,  and  the  population  certainly  did 
not  starve  in  spite  of  the  women’s  high 
fertility. 

Let  us  examine  more  closely  the  second  as- 
pect— the  maintenance  of  the  population.  It 
was  stable  and  an  extraordinarily  high  birth 
rate  implies  in  these  circumstances  a very  high 
death  rate  among  infants  and  small  children 
so  that  only  a fraction  reached  the  reproductive 
age.  This  was,  indeed,  the  situation  among  the 
Groote  Eylandt  people.  The  writer  estimated 
that  at  least  60  per  cent  of  infants  died  before 
they  reached  their  first  birthday  and  there  was 
a correspondingly  high  death  rate  among 
young  children.  In  these  circumstances  the 
aborigines’  concern  with  the  fertility  of  women 
was  well  founded.5 

explosion  has  taken  place.  In  1941  there  were  between 
300  to  350  aborigines  on  the  island;  in  1965  the  popula- 
tion had  increased  to  over  600.  At  the  symposium  it  was 
argued  that  infanticide  must  have  been  a feature  of  all 
hunting-collecting  communities.  Undoubtedly  infanti- 
cide occurred,  but  only  under  duress.  It  is  this  writer’s 
view  that  the  “normal”  wastage  owing  to  high  infant 
and  young  children  mortality  rates  would  render 
infanticide  unnecessary  in  ordinary  circumstances.  We 
are  inclined  to  think  of  our  own  infant  mortality  rate  of 


204  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

But  why  the  concern  with  the  fertility  of 
nature  if  there  was  plenty  of  game  and  vege- 
table foods?  The  aborigines  know  from  their 
own  experience,  if  they  are  older  men,  or  from 
what  they  have  been  told  if  they  are  not,  that 
in  the  past  there  have  been  times  when  the 
land  was  gripped  by  drought  so  that  the 
kangaroos  became  scarce  and  thin  and  the 
yams  were  not  to  be  found.  The  people  then 
were  truly  faced  by  starvation.  The  aborigines’ 
prime  interest  in  the  fertility  of  nature  is  to 
maintain  the  status  quo  where  there  is  an 
abundance  of  kangaroos  and  yams,  and  above 
all  to  avoid  a recurrence  of  the  situation  when 
the  land  was  gripped  by  drought.  They  also 
know  that  in  spite  of  all  the  magical  and 
religious  means  they  employ  in  their  increase 
rituals  and  no  matter  how  beneficently  nature 
may  be  smiling  on  them  today,  perhaps  next 
year,  the  year  after,  or  in  five  or  ten  years  the 
land  will  again  be  visited  by  drought  and  once 
again  they  will  face  starvation. 

At  the  low  technical  level  of  hunting  and 
gathering,  man  is  a parasite  on  nature.  Apart 
from  his  meager  equipment,  the  attribute  he 
possesses  which  prevents  his  own  population 
numbers  being  subjected  to  the  violent  fluctua- 
tions of  the  other  fauna  in  his  environment  is 
his  social  organization  and  the  reciprocity  and 
co-operation  it  implies.  Most  of  the  time  the 
need  for  cooperation  and  reciprocity,  specifi- 
cally of  the  political  land-owning  groups,  is  not 
immediately  apparent;  but  when  drought  or 
other  natural  catastrophe  occurs,  cooperation 
and  reciprocity  in  the  division  of  the  few  avail- 
able food  resources  on  the  tracts  of  land  owned 
by  the  various  groups  is  a matter  of  life  and 
death  for  the  community  as  a whole.  It  is  only 
at  these  times  of  food  shortage  that  infanticide 
has  the  sanction  of  the  society.  It  is  better  to 

about  2 per  cent  as  normal.  This  low  figure  is  in  fact  a 
relatively  new  phenomenon.  For  instance,  in  1880  the 
infant  mortality  rate  in  Germany  was  about  25  per  cent. 
A “normal”  infant  mortality  rate  of  at  least  60  per  cent 
for  a hunting-collecting  society — as  the  writer  estimated 
for  Groote  Eylandt  in  1941 — should  not  be  considered 
as  excessive.  It  is  the  writer’s  opinion  that  under  tradi- 
tional conditions  the  fertility  of  Australian  aboriginal 
women  throughout  the  continent  was  not  greatly  differ- 
ent from  that  of  the  Groote  Eylandt  women  and  that 
bearing  an  average  of  eighteen  children  between  puberty 
and  the  menopause  would  not  be  excessive.  At  the 
symposium  a figure  of  4 was  mentioned : this  seems  much 
too  low. 


destroy  an  infant  or  young  child  whose  chances 
of  survival  are  small  anyway  than  to  hinder  the 
mother  unnecessarily  in  her  task  of  food  col- 
lecting. When  times  are  better,  she  will  breed 
again.  The  belief  in  spirit-children  gives  her 
the  solace  that  her  dead  child’s  spirit  will  re- 
turn to  the  store  of  spirit-children  awaiting  to 
be  reborn. 

We  have  digressed  somewhat  from  the  main 
theme  of  this  contribution  to  resolve  the  ap- 
parent contradictions  implied  by  Sahlins’ 
paper.  By  doing  so  we  have  underlined  how 
cooperation  and  reciprocity  is  a matter  of  life 
and  death  for  aboriginal  society. 

Before  dealing  with  the  question  of  male 
initiation — the  third  side  of  the  triangle — we 
shall  discuss  what  we  have  called  “marriage 
gerontocracy”  in  Australia.  This  was  the 
limited  subject  of  the  writer’s  paper  read  at 
the  Chicago  symposium  and  the  following  with 
suitable  additions  and  comments  arising  from 
the  discussion  largely  follows  what  was  pre- 
sented to  the  symposium. 

Marriage  Gerontocracy  in  Australia 

What  do  we  understand  by  Australian  mar- 
riage gerontocracy?6  Eylmann  in  a few  words 
gave  a good  description.7  He  wrote  that  “mar- 
riage relations  of  the  Australian  Aborigines  are 
remarkable  in  that  an  eighteen  to  twenty-five 
year  old  man  often  has  no  wife,  or  if  he  does 
she  is  old  enough  to  be  his  grandmother,  while 
the  oldest,  most  influential  men  in  the  com- 
munity, on  the  average  have  most  wives, 
amongst  them  not  infrequently  very  old  women 
and  girls  in  their  early  teens”  (1902,  p.  13 1 ) . 

6.  The  use  of  the  expression  “gerontocracy,”  which 
literally  means  “government  by  the  old  people”  in  the 
sense  of  marriage  of  older  men  with  young  girls,  was 
criticized  at  the  symposium.  This  criticism  is,  of  course, 
valid.  Is  there  a better  expression? 

7.  Eylmann’s  (1902,  p.  131;  original  read  as  follows: 
“im  Binnenlande  und  vielleicht  auch  im  nordlichen 
Kiistengebiet  sind  die  ehelichen  Verhaltnisse  insofern 
recht  sonderbar,  als  die  achtzehn  bis  f unfundzwanzig- 
jahrigen  Manner  oft  ganz  unbeweibt  sind,  oder  eine 
Ehegenossin  besitzen,  die  dem  Alter  nach  ihre  Gross- 
mutter  sein  konnte,  und  die  Altesten,  die  Einfluss- 
reichsten  des  Gemeinwesens,  durchgangig  die  meisten 
Frauen  haben,  und  sich  unter  diesen  nicht  selten 
Greisinnen  und  noch  in  Backfischalter  stehende  Personen 
befinden.” 


Rose  Australian  Marriage,  Land-Owning  Groups,  and  Initiations 


Although  probably  the  best  brief  statement 
of  the  matter,  we  would  not  entirely  agree 
with  Eylmann’s  description.  For  instance,  we 
would  not  say  that  in  traditional  conditions  it 
was  the  oldest  men  who  had  most  wives.  Rather, 
it  was  the  older  men  in  their  forties  or  fifties. 
Eylmann’s  statement  that  it  was  the  “most 
influential”  men  who  had  most  wives  would 
support  this  viewpoint. 

From  what  he  wrote,  one  could  draw  the 
conclusion  that  girls  were  married  at  puberty. 
It  is  our  observation  that  under  traditional  or 
near  traditional  conditions  a girl  went  to  live 
with  her  first  husband  when  she  was  con- 
siderably younger — about  9 years  old,  with 
intercourse  delayed  until  she  had  reached 
puberty.  Going  to  live  with  her  first  husband 
should  not  be  confused  with  the  fact  that  a 
girl  was  promised  to  a man  when  she  was  much 
younger  or  even  before  she  was  born. 

With  these  minor  strictures  the  situation  that 
Eylmann  describes  has  some  important  conse- 
quences. We  see  that  the  young  girls  go  as 
wives  to  the  older  men  while  the  old  women 
can  be  wives  of  men  of  any  age.  One  can  say 
that  the  older  men  have  a monopoly  of  the 
younger  women,  while  also  having  some  of  the 
old  or  older  women.  The  normal  population 
pyramid  of  an  aboriginal  society — as,  of  course, 
in  our  own  society — shows  that  there  are  con- 
siderably more  females  in  their  teens  and 
twenties  than  men  in  their  forties  or  fifties.  As 
an  obvious  consequence  these  older  men  are 
married  polygynously.  This  frequently  reported 
fact  deserves  mention  here  since  polygyny  is  a 
corollary  of  gerontocracy  and  it  would  perhaps 
be  better  to  speak  of  “polygyny-gerontocracy” 
and  not  merely  of  “gerontocracy.” 

Another  logical  consequence  of  the  situation 
described  by  Eylmann,  but  one  which  is  more 
rarely  reported,  is  that  a woman  in  the  course 
of  her  lifetime  has  several  husbands.  Hart  wrote 
for  the  Tiwi  of  Melville  and  Bathurst  Islands 
that  “while  a woman  goes  to  live  with  her 
husband  at  about  thirteen,  a man  is  lucky  to 
get  his  first  wife  under  the  age  of  35.  It  follows 
that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  father  of 
children  dies  long  before  the  mother.  There- 
fore ...  a woman  passes  through  the  possession 
of  quite  a number  of  different  men  during  her 
lifetime”  (1930,  p.  282).  On  Groote  Eylandt  a 
woman  had  at  least  four  husbands  in  the  course 


205 

of  a full  lifetime.  This  number  is  quite  apart 
from  clandestine  sex  relations.  By  the  same 
token  a man  had  at  least  four  wives — for  the 
most  part  polygynously — in  the  course  of  his 
lifetime.  Marriage  in  Australia  is  thus  seen  to 
be  an  extraordinarily  fluid  institution.  Al- 
though at  any  one  time  polygynous  unions  are 
in  the  minority,  most  men  who  lived  to  old  age 
would  spend  part  of  their  lives  married  poly- 
gynously. Similarly  a woman  lived  at  least  part 
of  her  lifetime  inside  a collective  of  co-wives. 
In  this  sense  we  can  say  that  polygyny  is  the 
rule  and  monogamy  the  exception. 

Before  discussing  the  attempts  made  to 
interpret  this  fluidity  of  Australian  marriage, 
something  can  be  said  on  the  distribution  of 
marriage  gerontocracy  inside  Australia.  The 
evidence  is  at  times  contradictory ; nevertheless 
it  would  appear  that  gerontocracy  was  a feature 
of  marriage  throughout  Australia  and  Tas- 
mania (Rose,  1960b,  pp.  91-99,  234-36,  482). 
It  is  a remarkable  fact  that  some  observers  with 
wide  experience  of  aborigines  under  traditional 
conditions  did  not  report  gerontocracy  in  areas 
where  it  is  known  definitely  to  have  existed. 
For  instance,  in  his  monograph  Economic  Struc- 
ture and  the  Ceremonial  Exchange  Cycle  in  Arnhem 
Land  (1949),  Thomson  does  not  once  mention 
gerontocracy  although  it  clearly  would  have 
had  considerable  bearing  on  the  subject  with 
which  he  was  dealing.  Similarly  Sir  Baldwin 
Spencer  (1914)  does  not  mention  it  among  the 
Tiwi.  One  can  explain  these  omissions  by  the 
assumption  that  these  particular  observers  had 
become  so  used  to  gerontocracy  as  part  of  the 
fabric  of  aboriginal  society  that  they  simply 
ignored  it.  In  the  writer’s  own  case  it  was  not 
until  he  examined  the  actual  ages  of  man  and 
wife  in  the  Groote  Eylandt  family  units  that  he 
realized  how  pronounced  it  was.  Without  the 
actual  age  data  he  would  also  probably  have 
ignored  it,  although,  of  course,  in  general  terms 
he  was  quite  aware  that  in  Australian  societies 
a man  tended  to  marry  a woman  considerably 
younger  than  himself. 

The  evidence  for  polygyny-gerontocracy  is 
further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  it  can  dis- 
appear very  rapidly  under  contact  situations. 
A report  of  its  absence,  or  the  fact  that  the 
aborigines  married  monogamously,  by  no 
means  disproves  the  existence  of  polygyny- 
gerontocracy  under  traditional  conditions. 


2o6  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

Elkin  (1954,  p.  127  note)  has  noted  its  disap- 
pearance under  contact  situations,  and  the 
writer  has  shown  that  it  is  particularly  the 
change  in  the  economic  activity  of  the  women 
under  such  conditions  that  leads  to  its  disap- 
pearance (Rose,  1965b,  pp.  75-83  passim).  As 
a consequence,  in  evaluating  the  older  writers 
it  is  necessary  to  determine  under  what  contact 
situation  the  observations  were  made.  Taking 
the  reports  at  their  face  value  is  unsatisfactory; 
a certain  historical  research  is  also  necessary. 

In  spite  of  the  popular  opinion  that  Australia 
is  virtually  a land  of  near  deserts  and  steppes, 
the  ecological  conditions  are,  in  fact,  extremely 
varied.  The  universality  of  polygyny-geronto- 
cracy is  surprising  and  would  indicate  an  ex- 
tremely low  degree  of  specialization  in  the 
social  organization  to  meet  the  particular 
ecological  situations. 

Interpretation  of 
Marriage  Gerontocracy 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  question  mentioned 
earlier,  the  fluidity  of  the  marriage  relation  as 
the  result  of  polygyny-gerontocracy.  A problem 
which  has  occupied  the  writer  since  he  first 
described  in  statistical  terms  the  polygyny- 
gerontocracy  of  the  Groote  Eylandt  people  and 
its  universality  in  Australia  has  been  finding 
an  interpretation  of  the  custom. 

A perfectly  rational  explanation  is,  of 
course,  that  it  is  “natural”  for  the  older,  most 
influential  men  to  monopolize  the  younger 
and  more  desirable  women  to  the  exclusion  of 
their  younger  clansmen  (Fison  and  Howitt, 
1880,  p.  355).  But  a more  objective  explana- 
tion was  sought;  that  is  to  say,  a reason  that 
was  independent  of  the  will  or  wishes  of  the 
individual.  The  explanation  mentioned  ap- 
peared to  stand  the  issue  on  its  head.  To  ex- 
plain the  power  of  the  older  men  to  monopolize 
the  women  in  terms  of  its  being  “natural”  for 
them  to  do  so,  was,  in  fact,  no  explanation.  It 
was  unsatisfactory,  first,  because  it  did  not 
explain  how  the  older  men  obtained  this  power 
and  secondly,  because,  as  had  frequently  been 
observed,  polygyny-gerontocracy  disappears 
extremely  quickly  once  the  economic  basis  of 
the  society  changes,  apparently  without  any 
effective  resistance  from  the  older  men.  This 


latter  consideration  would  seem  to  point  to  a 
material,  possibly  ultimately  a relatively  simple 
economic  explanation  of  polygyny-geronto- 
cracy. 

On  the  basis  of  his  own  data,  the  writer  pro- 
pounded an  hypothesis  which  ran  generally  as 
follows.  The  women  tended  to  aggregate  them- 
selves in  collectives  of  co-wives  around  the  men 
at  the  peak  of  their  productive  capacity  and 
this  tendency  reached  its  maximum  when  the 
women  had  their  greatest  child-bearing  and 
child-rearing  burdens.8  It  will  be  immediately 
noted  that  in  this  explanation  it  was  the  women 
and  not  the  men  who  took  the  active  role  to 
establish  polygynous  units,  and  that  this  type  of 
family  provided  the  optimum  conditions  for  the 
rearing  of  the  younger  generation  inside  the 
collectives  of  co-wives  of  the  polygynous 
families. 

The  writer  went  further  and  suggested  that 
the  men  were  at  the  peak  of  their  productive 
capacity  when  they  were  in  their  early  forties 
and  the  women  had  their  greatest  burdens  to 
bear  when  they  were  about  24  (Rose,  1960a; 

1963)- 

Unfortunately  for  this  neat  theory,  Ashley- 
Montagu  (1957)  has  provided  certain  biologi- 
cal facts  that  showed  that-  the  women’s  maxi- 
mum burden  in  caring  for  children  must  have 
occurred  when  they  were  considerably  older 
than  24.  Then  Meggitt  (1965b)  produced  com- 
parative figures  on  polygyny-gerontocracy  for 
the  Walbiri.  On  this  particular  point  his  results 
did  not  confirm  the  original  hypothesis,  and 
Meggitt  sought  a “multifactoral”  explanation 
of  maximum  polygyny;  Nevertheless,  it  would 
seem  that  the  difference  between  the  writer’s 
and  Meggitt’s  conclusions  on  this  point  are 
more  apparent  than  real.  While  the  explana- 
tion of  maximum  polygyny  may,  as  Meggitt 
expressed  it,  be  multifactoral,  the  writer  is  not 
convinced  that  the  essential  explanation  of 
polygyny-gerontocracy  in  Australia  cannot  be 


8.  It  was  suggested  at  the  symposium  that  productive 
capacity  should  be  taken  in  a wider  sense  to  include  the 
organizing  ability  of  current  activities  by  these  older 
men,  and  that  in  this  sense  the  peak  of  their  productive 
capacity  is  reached  in  their  early  forties.  This  suggestion 
has  much  to  commend  it. 


Rose  Australian  Marriage,  Land-Owning,  Groups  and  Initiations 


given  in  the  general  terms  originally  formu- 
lated.9 


Initiation 

We  can  now  return  to  the  question  of  male 
initiation  and  its  relation  to  marriage  and  to  the 
cooperation  between  the  land-owning  groups. 

The  discussion  above  on  marriage  geronto- 
cracy has  shown  that  the  Australian  aboriginal 
society  is  on  the  horns  of  a dilemma.  On  the 
one  side  there  is  the  tendency  for  the  women 
to  aggregate  themselves  around  men  at  the 
peak  of  their  productive  activity  with  this 
tendency  reaching  a maximum  when  the  wo- 
men have  their  greatest  maternal  burdens  to 
bear.  This  situation  leads  to  the  older  men — 
past  their  physical  and  sexual  peak — mono- 
polizing the  women  in  polygynous  units.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  younger  men — at  their 
physical  and  sexual  peak — are  virtually  with- 
out women,  or  at  most  with  a woman  old 
enough  to  be  their  grandmother.  Economic 
necessity,  expressed  as  a need  to  provide  col- 
lectives of  co-wives  in  which  to  raise  the  infants 
and  young  children,  comes  into  conflict  with 
the  sexual  drive  of  the  younger  men  who  are 
denied  women.  This  contradiction  in  Aus- 
tralian society  has  been  resolved  by  the  older 
men  controlling  the  younger  through  the  ela- 
borate system  of  male  initiation  found  in 
Australia. 

It  would  take  us  too  far  to  consider  the 
various  forms  initiation  takes,  but  even  though 
the  forms  vary  considerably,  they  all  have 
certain  features  in  common.  The  first  is  that 
the  full  series  of  initiation  covers  a span  of  a 

9.  At  the  symposium  it  was  pointed  out  that  there  was 
a high  correlation  between  the  incidence  of  polygyny 
and  age  difference  between  man  and  wife.  From  the 
population  pyramid  this  is  a rational  conclusion  and  the 
positive  correlation  is  what  one  would  expect.  It  was 
suggested  that  polygyny-gerontocracy  in  Australia  was 
merely  an  extreme  case  of  a world-wide  phenomenon. 
Viewing  the  Australian  data  as  purely  one  of  a world- 
wide sample,  that  conclusion  is,  of  course,  correct.  But 
the  difference  between  polygyny-gerontocracy  in 
Australia  and,  for  example,  in  black  Africa  or  among 
Muslim  Arabs  is  not  just  one  of  degree.  There  is  a differ- 
ence of  kind  which  is  fundamental.  The  reasons  for 
polygyny  in  Australia  are  quite  different  from  the 
reasons  for  polygyny  in  black  Africa  or  among  Muslim 
Arabs. 


207 

young  man’s  lifetime  from  before  puberty 
until  his  middle  or  late  twenties. 

The  second  feature  is  that  the  initiate  can- 
not form  an  economic  alliance  for  the  founda- 
tion of  a family  with  a woman  (i.e.,  marry  her) , 
until  he  has  completed  his  initiation. 

Third,  the  initiate  is  instructed  by  didactic 
methods  both  in  the  ecology  of  the  country  in 
which  he  lives  and  in  the  art  of  obtaining  the 
wherewithal  of  life.  He  absorbs  this  knowledge 
by  learning  the  tribal  myths  and  by  witnessing 
the  cult  ceremonies  centered  on  the  wander- 
ings and  creative  feats  of  the  heroes  of  the 
Dreamtime. 

Fourth,  the  initiation  of  a youth  is  not  simply 
a domestic  matter  of  his  own  land-owning 
group,  but  is  an  issue  ofintergroup  importance. 
Relatives  who  can  and  frequently  do  play  an 
important  role  in  a youth’s  initiation  are  his 
mother’s  brother,  his  male  patrilateral  cross- 
cousin (who  is  sometimes  his  sister’s  husband), 
his  sister’s  husband  when  he  is  not  the  initiate’s 
patrilateral  cross-cousin,  and  a representative 
of  the  land-owning  group  from  which  he  will 
later  obtain  a wife.  All  of  these  relatives  belong 
to  land-owning  groups  other  than  the  initiate’s 
own,  and  each  of  these  groups  in  its  own  way 
has  a vested  interest  in  the  youth’s  initiation. 

Fifth,  during  part  of  his  initiation  extending 
over  some  years,  a youth  is  attached  to,  and  is 
under  the  strict  control  and  tutelate  of,  a 
guardian,  a considerably  older  man.  This 
guardian  is  frequently  the  youth’s  sister’s  hus- 
band. This  relationship  has  definite  advantages 
for  the  guardian.  He  not  only  has  the  responsi- 
bility of  continuing  by  practical  example  the 
instruction  of  the  initiate  in  the  hunting  of 
game  and  the  other  manly  arts,  but  he  also 
has  rights  to  dispose  of  what  foodstuffs  the 
initiate  brings  back  to  camp.  The  guardian’s 
interest  in  controlling  an  initiate  is  not  greatly 
dissimilar  to  his  interest  in  controlling  the 
initiate’s  sister  as  wife.  It  is  indicative  of  the 
relationship  existing  between  initiate  and 
guardian  that  on  Groote  Eylandt  the  mis- 
sionaries frequently  referred  to  the  initiate  as 
a “boy  slave”  or  alternatively  as  a “boy  wife.” 
Stealing  of  young  wives  from  their  husbands 
was  a feature  of  traditional  life  on  Groote 
Eylandt,  and  it  is  significant  that  initiates  were 
stolen  in  the  same  way  and  as  frequently  from 
their  guardians  (Rose,  1960b,  p.  73). 


208  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

Sixth,  the  initiate  is  secluded  for  long  periods 
in  the  bush,  during  which  time  he  has  to  fend 
for  himself.  Moreover,  he  is  obliged  to  travel 
over  and  live  on  the  country  of  several  land- 
owning groups  other  than  his  own. 

Conclusion 

We  have  seen  how  the  preoccupation  of  the 
aborigines  with  maintaining  human  fertility 
has  a real  material  basis.  In  order  that  adequate 
population  replacements  survive  the  dangerous 
first  decade  of  life,  women  with  infants  and 
young  children  to  care  for,  tend  to  live  in 
collectives  of  co-wives  (i.e.,  in  polygynous 
units)  centered  around  experienced  men  at 
the  peak  of  their  economic  production.  This 
economic  necessity  is  in  conflict  with  the  fact 
that  the  younger  men  at  the  peak  of  their 
physical  strength  and  sexual  activity  have 
virtually  no  women  available  to  them.  The 
contradiction  is  resolved  socially  by  the  control 
exerted  through  initiation  of  the  young  men. 
To  this  extent  marriage  and  initiation  are 
complementary. 

We  have  also  seen  how  the  preoccupation  of 
the  aborigines  with  maintaining  the  fertility  of 
nature  has  a real  material  basis.  The  very 
survival  of  the  society  depends  on  the  reci- 
procity and  cooperation  between  the  political 
units — the  land-owning  groups — in  the  sphere 
of  food  resource  utilization.  Similarly,  the  sur- 
vival of  the  society  depends  on  the  maintenance 
of  the  type  of  marriage  and  initiation  des- 
cribed, and  the  reciprocity  and  cooperation 
of  the  land-owning  groups  are  also  manifested 
in  this  sphere. 

These  two  spheres  of  reciprocity  and  co- 
operation are  not  two  separate  categories  for 
the  aborigines  as  they  may  appear  to  be  to  the 
ethnologist;  they  form  an  integrated  unity. 
This  is  achieved  by  the  marked  sexual  division 
of  labor  found  generally  throughout  Australia 
— the  woman  normally  collecting  the  vegetable 
foodstuffs  while  the  man  is  responsible  for 


providing  meat.  The  giving  and  receiving  of 
females  in  marriage  is  not  merely  the  realloca- 
tion of  a person  who  will  produce  babies  that 
will  eventually  help  to  maintain  the  group’s 
numbers,  but  it  is  also  the  reallocation  of  a 
gatherer  of  vegetable  foodstuffs  who  plays  an 
important  part  in  food  resource  utilization. 

The  giving  of  a girl  in  marriage  implies  that 
her  husband  and  her  children  have  a virtual 
right  to  utilize  the  resources  of  her  natal 
group’s  land.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  the 
girl’s  fellow  clansmen  have  a great  interest  in 
her  future  husband  and  thus  assume  certain 
responsibilities  in  his  initiation. 

It  is  on  the  above  basis,  with  all  the  contra- 
dictions it  involves,  that  the  whole  super- 
structure of  aboriginal  cult  and  religious  life 
has  been  logically  erected  by  the  aborigines.  A 
discussion  of  this  superstructure  and  its  con- 
nection with  the  basis  was,  however,  not  the 
purpose  of  this  contribution. 

The  method  used  here  at  first  glance  may 
appear  to  be  a functional,  nonhistorical  inter- 
pretation of  various  institutions  of  aboriginal 
society  in  the  classical  sense  that  they  are  des- 
cribed as  a functioning  whole.  What,  in  fact, 
has  been  described  is  the  interconnection  be- 
tween certain  relations  of  production,  in  the 
historical  materialists’  sense  of  the  expression. 
The  historical  materialists’  view  is  that  the 
relations  of  production — and  essentially,  as  we 
have  dealt  with  them  here,  marriage,  initia- 
tion and  the  land-owning  group  relations  as 
such — are  determined  by  the  forces  of  produc- 
tion. The  development  of  these  forces  of  pro- 
duction is  the  motor  of  human  history.  Al- 
though it  was  not  the  purpose  of  this  contribu- 
tion to  examine  the  development  of  these  forces 
of  production,  it  can  be  remarked  that,  in  so 
far  as  the  Australian  aborigines  are  the  least 
developed  Qf  any  known  people,  they  occupy 
a key  position  in  our  understanding  of  earliest 
human  social  development.  To  elaborate  on 
this  theme  would  take  us  far  afield.  However, 
it  has  been  dealt  with  cursorily  elsewhere  (Rose, 
1960a). 


22. 


Discussions,  Part  IV 


22a.  Gerontocracy  and  Polygyny 

Speakers:  Bicchieri , Bulmer,  Gardner,  Isaac, 

Pilling,  Rose,  Slobodin,  Whiting,  Woodburn 

Rose  : I would  like  to  make  one  point  about 
the  possible  significance  of  gerontocracy.  It  is 
interesting  that  gerontocracy  is  found  through- 
out Australia  and  in  Tasmania,  and  I think  the 
question  must  be  asked  whether  gerontocracy/ 
polygyny  was  not  also  possibly  a characteristic 
of  the  Paleolithic. 

Woodburn:  I think  it  is  essential  that  we 
look  for  a term  to  replace  “gerontocracy.” 
This  has  been  with  us  for  some  time,  but  I do 
not  think  it  is  too  late  to  make  a change.  The 
term  literally  means  “government  by  old 
men.”  Now,  in  the  first  place,  we  are  dealing 
with  men  aged  30  and  up.  The  second  objec- 
tion is  to  the  connotation  of  political  power. 
In  fact,  we  are  dealing  with  differential  age  at 
marriage  and  not  necessarily  with  the  implica- 
tion that  political  power  is  involved. 

Slobodin:  To  respond  to  Woodburn — 
gerontocracy  may  or  may  not  be  applicable 
to  an  ethnographic  situation  on  empirical 
grounds,  but  the  word  does  not  necessarily,  or 
even  usually,  mean  “rule  by  the  aged.”  The 
morpheme  -cracy  is  from  Greek  kratein,  which 
means  “to  rule,”  but  also  it  more  generally 
means  “to  exert  power,”  from  kratos, 
“strength.”  Surely  those  Australian  42-year- 
olds  exert  power! 


Whiting:  In  a cross-cultural  study  of  poly- 
gyny and  its  correlates,  I found  that  wherever 
polygyny  occurs  the  ages  at  marriage  are  about 
25  for  men  and  1 5 for  women;  while  the  aver- 
ages in  monogamous  societies  are  19  for  men 
and  17  for  women.  Now,  these  statistics  hold 
fairly  constant  irrespective  of  the  presence  or 
absence  of  gerontocracy;  polygyny  alone  is  the 
variable  that  accounts  for  some  of  the  difference 
in  ages. 

Although  polygyny  is  not  directly  related  to 
hunting  and  gathering,  it  does  seem  to  be 
related  chiefly  to  nomadism,  where  the  task 
of  carrying  children  makes  child  spacing  neces- 
sary. And  it  is  most  frequent  when  postpartum 
sex  taboo  is  the  means  of  child  spacing.  If  the 
postpartum  sex  taboo  is  two  or  three  years,  the 
man  takes  a second  wife  to  help  carry  the 
burden  of  the  child  and  for  purposes  of  sexual 
access.  This  leads  to  enforced  bachelorhood  for 
the  younger  men,  thereby  giving  rise  to  the 
idea  that  polygyny  and  gerontocracy  are 
correlated. 

Gardner:  However  one  can  have  geronto- 
gamy  without  gerontocracy.  The  Paliyans  had 
gerontogamy  of  both  sorts  with  both  older 
males  and  older  females.  Very  frequently  this 
evolved  without  ceremony  out  of  adoptive 
parent-child  relationships.  The  child,  when 
attaining  freedom  from  the  authority  of  anyone 
else  (at  about  9 years  of  age),  quickly  slips  into 
the  spouse’s  role.  The  point  is  that  there  is  no 
authority  difference  between  spouses  nor  any 


209 


2io  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

use  of  marriage  as  a device  for  obtaining 
authority,  and  the  suffix  “-ocracy”  would  be 
most  inappropriate.  In  reply  to  Whiting’s 
point  I might  add  that  the  combined  incidence 
of  polygyny  and  polyandry  is  under  5 per  cent, 
while  10  per  cent  of  the  Paliyan  marriages  (and 
a different  10  per  cent)  are  gerontogamous.  It 
would  be  impossible  in  this  case,  and  perhaps 
in  others,  to  call  gerontogamy  a simple  result 
of  polygamy. 

Isaac:  I would  like  to  ask  whether  it  is 
normal  for  a man’s  food-productive  capacity 
to  reach  a maximum  as  late  as  42  years  of  age 
among  hunting  people. 

Rose  : I did  not  have  any  direct  evidence  for 
the  specific  age  of  42,  but  I found  that  there 
was  tendency  for  a woman  to  marry  a man  of 
42  (or  41,  or  39)  in  Australia,  quite  indepen- 
dently of  her  own  age.  (There  is  a correlation 
coefficient  approaching  zero  between  the  ages 
of  husband  and  wife  in  Australia,  while,  of 
course,  in  our  own  society  it  approaches  one.) 
And  I assumed  that  the  reason  for  this  was  that 
the  man  was  at  his  peak  of  production.  I did 
not  try  to  measure  production,  however. 

Pilling:  I think  it  would  be  fruitful  to  re- 
view Dr.  Rose’s  material  with  this  question  in 
mind : Are  the  figures  the  same  when  a woman 
is  marrying  a man  who  already  has  a wife  as 
when  she  is  marrying  a single  man?  I suspect 
that  the  motivation  for  polygyny  may  be  less 
the  sexual  gratification  of  the  male  than  the 
carrying  of  co-wife’s  burden  during  intensive 
nursing  or  late  pregnancy,  when  a man’s  wife 
is  less  productive  as  a gatherer. 

Rose:  My  data  on  that  are  available  and  can 
be  examined  from  that  viewpoint  (Rose, 
1960b).  Strehlow  gives  some  data  on  this 
particular  issue  and  makes  the  point  that  a 
man  often  takes  another  wife  when  his  first 
wife  is  in  an  advanced  stage  of  pregnancy. 

Bulmer:  I am  a little  puzzled  by  our  new 
mystical  number  for  peak  production  in  a 
man’s  early  forties.  I can  easily  understand 
that  he  might  be  at  the  peak  of  his  political 
capacity  at  that  age,  but  it  would  be  hard  in 
any  society  to  demonstrate  that  his  economic 
capacity  was  greatest  at  such  an  age.  If,  in 
fact,  political  or  social  influence  is  at  stake, 
this  would  seem  to  hinge  back  upon  marriage 
arrangements  and  create  a rather  circular 
system. 


Bicchieri:  I would  like  to  pursue  Dr.  Bul- 
mer’s  reaction  to  Dr.  Rose’s  idea  that  man  is  at 
peak  production  in  his  early  forties.  This  is  a 
case  in  which  it  is  not  desirable  to  separate 
economic  from  political  and  social  factors. 
Social  organization  can  be  regarded  as  a 
technological  mechanism,  so  a man  of  45 — 
while  not  in  his  physical  prime— may  be  able 
to  manipulate  other  people  and  add  a share 
of  their  production  to  his  own,  gained  by 
physical  manipulation  of  the  environment. 
So  45  may  be  an  ideal  age  in  the  sense  of  peak 
ability  to  coordinate  productive  activities. 

22b.  Gidjingali 
Marriage  Arrangements: 

Comments  and  Rejoinder 

[Note:  This  exchange  of  correspondence  be- 
tween Levi-Strauss  and  Hiatt  was  received  by 
the  editors  after  the  symposium  on  Man  the 
Hunter.] 

Levi-Strauss:  It  is  quite  natural  that  an 
Australian  scholar  should  ignore  that  in  the 
French  anthropological  usage,  the  word  realia 
(Levi-Strauss  1966,  p.  1 1 5)  faked  after  the 
Latin,  does  not  mean  “what  really  happens” 
as  he  believes,  but  material  objects  of  the  kind 
unearthed  by  archeologists  such  as  buildings, 
statues,  coins,  tools,  and  weapons.  Besides, 
when  I suggested  that  new  techniques  such  as 
pollen  analysis  and  carbon- 14  may  improve 
what  Radcliffe-Brown  once  called  “conjec- 
tural history”  I was  certainly  not  referring  to 
kinship  systems.  Thus  in  two  instances  Hiatt’s 
poisonous  darts  fall  widely  off  the  mark  and  I 
am  afraid  that  the  same  can  be  said  for  the 
rest  of  his  paper. 

I have  not  made  any  claim  to  interpret  the 
kinship  system  and  marriage  rules  of  the 
Gidjingali  of  which  I had  never  heard  before 
and  I do  not  know  either  how  they  themselves 
explain  their  marriage  rules.  I know,  however, 
in  which  terms  informants  from  other  tribes 
have  explained  their  system  to  men  such  as 
Spencer  and  Gillen,  Strehlow,  Radcliffe- 
Brown,  Sharp,  Stanner,  Elkin,  Warner,  and 
many  others  and  I have  tried  to  articulate 
these  scattered  testimonies  in  a meaningful 
whole.  If  Hiatt’s  recent  observation  of  what  is 


Discussions,  Part  IV  2 1 1 


left  of  a collapsing  Australian  tribe  should 
carry  more  weight  than  the  bulk  of  the  older 
literature,  then  let  us  burn  the  books.  It  would 
probably  be  more  sensible  to  seek  in  demo- 
graphic and  other  factors  why  the  Gidjingali 
cannot  adhere  to  their  own  norms.  I agree 
that  it  is  important  to  find  out  what  really 
happens  in  any  society,  notwithstanding  its 
proclaimed  rules.  However,  my  past  work  on 
kinship  has  been  mostly  concerned  with  a 
different  problem:  to  ascertain  what  was  the 
meaning  of  the  rules,  whether  they  be  applied 
or  not.  For  rules  have  their  own  life  if  only  in 
the  mind  of  the  people  who  are  able  to  state 
them  and  to  translate  them  back  and  forth  at 
will  in  the  language  of  preferred  degrees  or  in 
that  of  sections  and  subsections.  This  should 
suffice  to  convince  us  that  these  two  languages 
are  not  as  wholly  disconnected  as  it  has  become 
fashionable  to  pretend.  Finally,  it  takes  more 
than  mere  naivete  to  believe  that  since  the 
theoretical  model  of  an  Aranda  system  requires 
only  four  patrilines,  the  system  itself  could  not 
ensure  marriage  exchange  between  28  clans 
or  many  more.  This  empirical  complexity  has 
become  commonplace  at  least  since  the  time 
of  Strehlow,  and  the  Gidjingali  case  teaches 
nothing  new  in  this  respect.  For  the  network 
can  be  woven  on  a shifting  basis  where  the 
four  lines  do  not  need  to  remain  the  same  ones. 
Unless  the  Gidjingali  marry  their  daughters  or 
sisters,  which  apparently  is  not  the  case,  my 
statement  that  “in  human  society  a man  must 
obtain  a woman  from  another  man  who  gives 
him  a daughter  or  a sister”  (the  French  word- 
ing was  more  elaborate:  “qui  la  lui  cede  sous 
forme  file  ou  de  soeur”)  holds  true  for  them  too. 
I never  claimed  that  this  was  happening  with- 
out intermediaries  and  I even  took  pains  to 
show  that  a delayed  exchange  remains  an 
exchange  none  the  less. 

Hiatt:  If  Levi-Strauss  is  putting  forward  a 
general  theory  of  Australian  kinship  (as  I have 
always  supposed),  then  the  fact  that  he  has 
never  heard  of  the  Gidjingali  until  now  is  of 
as  little  account  as  the  fact  that  Newton  was 
never  hit  on  the  head  by  a falling  paw-paw. 
His  insinuation  that  the  Gidjingali  do  not 
count  because  they  are  the  remnants  of  a 
collapsing  Australian  tribe  must  also  be  re- 
jected. I have  already  dealt  with  a similar 
objection  made  by  Birdsell  to  my  criticisms  of 


Radcliffe-Brown’s  generalizations  about  abori- 
ginal local  organization  (Chapter  1 7a,  this 
volume).  Levi-Strauss  supposes  that  some  ob- 
servers were  in  a better  position  to  describe 
traditional  aboriginal  social  life  simply  be- 
cause they  were  earlier  on  the  scene.  This 
ignores  the  fact  that  European  settlement  has 
advanced  slowly  over  the  continent  and  that 
anthropologists  have  regularly  worked  on  the 
frontiers,  never  beyond  them.  The  Gidjingali 
system  of  kinship  and  marriage  was,  at  the 
time  of  my  observations,  in  no  worse  state  of 
dislocation  than  those  studied  by  the  investi- 
gators Levi-Strauss  mentions. 

Levi-Strauss  suggests  that  it  would  be  more 
sensible  to  seek  in  demographic  and  other 
factors  an  answer  to  the  question  why  the 
Gidjingali  cannot  adhere  to  their  own  norms. 
This  is  a distressing  statement.  It  indicates  the 
great  difficulty  I shall  have  in  conveying  the 
distinction  that  exists  among  the  Gidjingali 
between  marriage  rules  stated  in  terms  of 
broad  kin  categories  and  rules  that  specify  in 
narrow  genealogical  terms  particular  women 
within  these  categories  to  whom  a man  has 
marriage  rights.  Anthropologists  in  the  past 
have  concentrated  upon  rules  of  the  former 
type,  and  it  is  upon  their  material  that  Levi- 
Strauss  has  based  his  analysis.  I must  insist 
that  in  this  respect  the  Gidjingali  are  not 
aberrant,  and  I repeat  that  roughly  90  per 
cent  of  their  marriages  are  in  accordance  with 
the  rules.  The  nonconformity  referred  to  by 
Levi-Strauss  occurs  in  relation  to  rules  of  the 
second  type,  and  I have  already  spent  a good 
deal  of  time  trying  to  explain  it  in  precisely 
the  terms  Levi-Strauss  recommends.  I regret 
that  my  effort  to  do  so  was  unsuccessful. 

Levi-Strauss  says  that  it  has  become  fashion- 
able to  deny  that  rules  stated  in  the  language 
of  preferred  degrees  and  in  the  language  of 
sections  or  subsections  can  be  translated  back 
and  forth  by  the  aborigines  at  will.  If  by  “pre- 
ferred degrees”  he  means  categories  of  kin  with 
whom  a marriage  would  be  morally  proper, 
then  it  is  clear  from  my  paper  that  I do  not 
subscribe  to  the  fashion.  What  I deny  is  that 
a marriage  rule  stated  in  terms  of  kin  categories 
or  subsections  is  equivalent  to  a rule  defining 
a man’s  right  to  only  certain  women  within 
these  categories  or  subsections. 

I apologize  for  failing  to  grasp  the  meaning 


2 r 2 Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

of  L6vi-Strauss’s  fake  Latin  and  for  assuming 
that  he  had  actually  said  that  one  cannot  study 
social  rules  independently  of  what  really  hap- 
pens. The  fact  remains,  as  his  final  remarks 
indicate,  that  he  does  believe  that  his  analytical 
models  have  empirical  counterparts;  in  parti- 
cular, that  when  he  describes  kinship  systems 
as  systems  of  communication  in  which  women 
are  mediators,  he  means  that  actual  women 
are  being  exchanged  by  actual  social  groups.  I 
have  argued  that  there  is  little  evidence  of 
either  a statistical  or  ideological  kind  to  support 
such  a view  in  relation  to  the  Gidjingali.  In  my 
paper  at  this  conference  I have  compared  the 
facts  with  a hypothetical  model  of  four  patri- 
cians; elsewhere  I have  tried  to  demonstrate 
that  there  is  even  less  evidence  for  an  extended 
network  of  exchange  (Hiatt,  1965,  p.  133). 

I am  baffled  by  Levi-Strauss’s  final  point.  I 
said  that  Gidjingali  men  exchange  their  sister’s 
daughters  but  do  not  have  rights  to  bestow  their 
own  daughters  or  sisters.  Levi-Strauss  insists 
that  they  do  exchange  daughters  or  sisters,  not 
directly  but  through  intermediaries.  Suppose 
for  the  sake  of  argument  that  we  were  able  to 
discover  cycles  of  the  postulated  kind.  We 
might  then  say:  “Gidjingali  men  exchange 
their  sister’s  daughters.  They  also  exchange 
their  daughters  or  sisters,  but  they  are  quite 
unaware  of  it.”  The  question  is  whether  this 
would  be  a meaningful  use  of  the  word 
“exchange.” 

22c.  The  Use  and  Misuse  of  Models 

Speakers:  Alland,  Helm,  Lathrap,  Laughlin,  Levi- 
Strauss,  Meggitt,  Pilling,  Schieffelin,  Sharp, 
Whiting. 

Alland:  I would  like  to  address  myself  to 
marriage  and  residence  rules.  We  find  rules 
that  do  not  work  or  are  misapplied,  rules  that 
do  not  exist,  and  variations  on  rules  that  might 
work  in  some  way  or  other.  In  short,  a model 
is  not  a model.  It  is  possible,  I suppose,  that 
mechanical  models  could  be  completely  false — 
a joint  creation  of  the  anthropologist  and  a 
zealous  informant.  It  is  more  likely,  however, 
that  the  models  which  some  anthropologists 
have  extracted  from  informants  do  exist,  but 
the  researcher’s  application  of  the  models  may 


be  based  on  a misunderstanding  of  what  they 
stand  for. 

What  of  the  existing  variation,  for  which  we 
now  have  a good  deal  of  empirical  evidence? 
Is  it  capricious,  or  does  it  reflect  scientific  laws? 
I prefer  the  latter  interpretation.  First,  we  must 
consider  those  cases  in  which  the  demographic 
facts  of  life  make  it  impossible  for  a people  to 
follow  their  rules,  and  so  they  do  the  best  they 
can.  Lounsbury  (1962)  in  his  review  of  Need- 
ham’s Structure  and  Sentiment,  suggests  that  “the 
best  they  can  do”  may,  indeed,  be  good  enough 
to  maintain  an  ongoing  system.  Computer 
simulation  study — particularly  that  published 
by  Kunstadter  on  cross-cousin  marriage  (Kun- 
stadter  et  al.,  1963)  indicates  that  “the  best 
they  can  do”  certainly  is  not  a replication  of 
the  model. 

It  seems  to  me  that  it  is,  at  least,  possible 
that  some  of  the  variations  in  residence  and 
marriage  reflect  adaptations  to  changing  con- 
ditions and  are,  therefore,  only  short-term 
fluctuations.  Meggitt  has,  I think,  suggested 
this  in  another  context.  These  variations  may 
reflect  the  operation  of  supporting  variables 
acting  to  maintain  a state  of  some  system.  The 
statistical  model,  then,  may  reflect  a certain 
degree  of  resource  management,  including  the 
allocation  of  men  and  women.  Thus,  a dia- 
chronic analysis  of  variation  in  relation  to 
ecological  variables  becomes  a vital  area  for 
research. 

In  my  own  analysis  of  residence  patterns 
among  the  Abron  of  the  Ivory  Coast,  I stated 
that  a mechanical  model  of  residence  told  me 
more  about  social  structure  than  did  a statis- 
tical analysis  of  residence  frequency,  in  which 
irregular  forms  of  residence  (i.e.,  those  that  did 
not  fit  the  model)  would  be  counted  along  with 
predictable  types.  How  might  this  view  be 
reconciled  with  my  suggestion  above  that  statis- 
tical rules  might  reveal  ecological  relation- 
ships ? I think  there  are  two  answers  to  this, 
either  of  which  might  apply  in  the  proper 
circumstances.  The  two  models  reflect  different 
aspects  of  the  system.  One  is  more  emic,  and 
the  other  more  etic  (if  one  likes  those  terms). 

1.  Traditional  categories  are  imprecise  and 
show  no  regularity,  because  they  do  not  reflect 
an  actual,  ordered  situation.  But  there  may  be 
some  undiscovered  order  in  the  data.  Thus,  in 
the  Abron  material,  I was  forced  to  consider — 


as  Fortes  had  done  for  the  Ashanti  (1949)— 
residence  rules  against  domestic  cycles.  Martial 
residence  alone  was  inadequate.  Unlike  Fortes, 
I then  extracted  rules  that  I considered  to  be 
significant  for  the  social  structure.  Deviations 
from  these  rules  were  seen  as  accidental  or 
temporary  aberrations  due  to  such  minor 
factors  as  housing  shortages. 

2.  A statistical  model  may  be  linked  into 
self-regulating  systems,  in  which  statistical 
variations  can  be  predicted  on  the  basis  of 
changing  values  of  some  other  variables,  such 
as  population  size,  age-  and  sex-pyramids, 
allocation  of  resources,  etc.  The  mechanical 
model  may,  as  other  conferees  have  noted, 
support  an  ideology  that  may  or  may  not  be 
related  to  marriage  and  residence — even  if 
informants  say  that  it  is — or  it  may  support 
partial  adherence  to  marriage  rules  that  are 
enough  to  sustain  a social  system. 

I would  suggest  offhand,  as  a hypothesis, 
that  as  technology  grows  in  complexity  (with 
the  concomitant  complexities  in  social  systems), 
strategies  of  maximization  related  to  direct 
confrontation  between  man  and  environment 
are  complicated  by  strategies  related  to  pro- 
perty relationships  and  other  social  aspects 
that  flow  from  these.  Stated  rules  then,  may 
be  violated  less  frequently  among  peoples  with 
higher  technologies  than  among  hunter- 
gatherers,  whose  pragmatism  is  closely  linked 
with  the  vagaries  of  the  base  environment. 

Levi-Strauss  : There  are  a few  remarks  that 
I would  like  to  make  on  the  papers  by  Messrs. 
Hiatt  and  Meggitt.  I do  not  feel  that  I have 
written  anything  original  about  the  Aranda 
system;  I utilized  the  existing  literature  and 
reasserted  the  interpretation  given  years  ago 
by  Durkheim,  on  the  one  hand,  and  van 
Gennep  on  the  other.  This  is,  namely,  that  the 
entire  set-up  of  the  system  can  be  explained  by 
a series  of  commutative  operations  between 
residence  and  clan  names,  so  that  a satisfactory 
interlocking  of  all  units  concerned  will  be 
assured,  generation  after  generation. 

I view  with  great  interest  Mr.  Meggitt’s 
statistical  correlations,  but  there  is  something 
that  I could  not  find  in  his  accounts;  i.e.,  what 
the  natives  themselves  say  about  their  sub- 
section system  and  its  relation  to  marriage. 
Trying  to  explain  such  things  merely  by  making 
statistical  runs  and  trying  to  build  up  correla- 


Discussions,  Part  IV  2 1 3 

tions  seems  to  me  to  amount  to  very  much  the 
same  situation  as  that  of  a man  who,  wishing 
to  understand  the  rules  of  the  game  of  chess, 
eschewed  a treatise  on  chess  in  favor  of  statis- 
tical runs  on  hundreds  of  thousands  of  games 
played  by  clumsy  players.  Of  course,  the 
clumsy  players  would  have  made  mistakes, 
and  the  analyst  would  have  no  way  of  distin- 
guishing these  from  moves  made  in  accordance 
with  the  rules. 

My  acquaintance  with  Australian  studies 
comes  by  way  of  the  literature,  and  I have 
been  very  much  impressed  by  the  fact  that 
whenever  there  are  verbatim  accounts  of  what 
native  informants  say,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that 
they  can  express  their  marriage  rules  in  terms 
of  sections  and  subsections.  I do  not  mean  that 
sections  and  subsections  are  nothing  other  than 
marriage  classes.  But  the  natives  are  able,  if 
need  be,  to  translate  the  marriage  rules  in 
terms  of  these  categories.  And  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  great  originality  of  the  Australian 
native  thinkers  is  shown  by  their  ability  to 
devise  a coherent  system  in  which  there  is  the 
possibility  of  translation  at  every  level  between 
the  social  organization,  the  marriage  rules,  and 
the  terminology. 

Now,  I am  also  aware  that  Elkin  discovered 
that  there  is  not  a close  correspondence  be- 
tween the  subsection  system  and  the  marriage 
rules  and,  further,  that  the  subsection  system 
expresses  a great  number  of  things  other  than 
marriage  rules.  Mr.  Meggitt  has  said  that  the 
system  expresses  primarily  the  order  of  the 
universe  and  only  incidentally  expresses  the 
marriage  rules.  I question  this.  Do  the  natives 
say  this?  Is  it  necessary  that  we  establish  a 
hierarchy  of  importance  and  exclude  the  possi- 
bility that  in  this  case  cosmology  and  marriage 
rules  may  be  on  a par  with  one  another?  Even 
if  the  section  and  subsection  system  expresses 
in  some  way  the  order  of  the  universe,  as 
conceptualized  by  the  natives,  and  even  if  the 
marriage  rules  normally  can  be  used  to  main- 
tain and  perpetuate  the  social  order,  it  never- 
theless seems  quite  obvious  that  if — for  demo- 
graphic or  other  reasons — the  marriage  rules 
do  not  work,  it  will  seem  more  important  to 
the  people  concerned  to  maintain  the  set-up 
than  to  follow  the  rules.  This,  I take  it,  is  what 
Elkin  has  pointed  out.  Yet  there  is  nothing  ex- 
traordinary about  this.  Every  society,  including 


214  Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

our  own,  would  do  exactly  the  same.  What 
is  important  for  us,  as  for  the  Australian, 
is  the  moral  order  and  the  representation  that 
we  have  of  the  universe.  And  if  the  rules  do 
not  succeed  in  maintaining  that  order,  then 
they  may  be  ignored.  This  does  not  mean, 
however  -speaking  of  our  own  society — that 
law,  institutions,  and  constitutions  are  entirely 
negligible  because  we  violate  them  every  time 
it  is  useful  to  do  so. 

Meggitt:  For  better  or  worse,  the  Australian 
aborigines  are  in  many  matters  far  more  sophis- 
ticated than  anthropologists.  By  their  own 
reports,  they  have  a hierarchical  view  of  the 
universe  and  give  primacy  to  the  rules  (such 
as  subsection  rules)  that  structure  the  universe. 
This  is  one  model.  This  model  is  unchanging, 
as  is  the  universe.  Where  they  differ  from  us  is 
in  the  fact  that  they  distinguish  a second  model 
for  marriage  arrangements,  while  we  keep 
trying  to  impose  the  universal  model  on  the 
marriage  realm.  Moreover,  they  point  out  that 
their  marriage  model  is  in  general  accord  with 
what  actually  happens;  and  they  take  care  to 
see  to  this,  insofar  as  demographic  and  other 
factors  allow  them  to.  For  them,  mating  is 
material  (hence,  a part  of  the  universal  model) , 
but  marriage  is  not.  So  they  are  able  to  maintain 
their  marriage  rules;  even  though  they  may  be 
mating  against  these  rules. 

Levi-Strauss  : I would  like  to  make  a dis- 
tinction here,  borrowing  an  illustration  from 
the  natural  sciences.  There  are  shapeless 
mollusks  living  in  the  sea  that  secrete  marvelous 
shells,  which  have  mathematical  properties. 
Now,  it  is  a problem  to  discover  how  a certain 
type  of  mollusk  secretes  a certain  type  of  shell. 
That  is,  if  you  like,  a problem  of  what  happens 
in  the  field,  and  it  is  a very  important  kind  of 
problem.  But  it  is  perfectly  legitimate  never 
even  to  look  at  the  mollusk,  and  to  try  to  learn 
the  mathematical  transformations  involved  in 
passage  from  one  type  of  shell  to  another. 
Either  type  of  investigation  is  worthwhile,  and 
they  are  entirely  distinct  from  one  another.  So 
we  may  make  use  of  both,  but  it  is  a mistake 
to  mix  the  two  operations  or  to  suppose  that 
we  are  doing  one  type  when,  in  fact,  we  are 
doing  the  other. 

Helm:  I cannot  see,  in  the  case  either  of  a 
mollusk  or  of  a human  community,  the  legiti- 
macy of  separating  the  pattern  or  map  and 


the  actual  behavior.  I should  think  that  it  is 
not  only  permissible  but  altogether  necessary 
that  we  keep  our  attention  on  the  relations  of 
the  two.  The  manipulation  of  models  in  the 
abstract  or  the  refusal  to  test  them  against 
events  “on  the  ground”  will  never  tell  us  to 
what  degree,  if  any,  societies  are  systems. 

Alland:  Ashby  (i960)  has  said  that  “a 
system  is  anything  that  the  investigator  cares 
to  define  as  one,”  but  I would  add  that  the 
investigator  has  the  responsibility  of  proving 
that  the  system  is  at  least  interesting.  Some 
events  which  the  anthropologist  rather  arbit- 
rarily fits  into  a class  of  behavior,  like  residence, 
may  be  more  significant  than  others,  at  least 
for  some  system  that  he  has  in  mind.  This  is 
what  I tried  to  do  with  the  Abron  data,  and  I 
think  that  in  my  treatment  of  it  I went  beyond 
Fortes’  treatment  of  his  data  on  the  Ashanti 
( 1 949) . He  wound  up  with  a range  of  residence 
rules  that  showed  that  the  Ashanti  were  not 
just  matrilocal  or  dual-lo.cal,  but  that  there 
was  matrilocality,  dual-locality,  etc.  I tried  to 
relate  this  to  a system  of  social  relationships 
having  to  do  with  lineal  stresses  in  the  society. 

Now,  there  are  two  things  that  interest  me 
in  rule  systems  when  the  rules  systems  are 
related  to  a single  set  of  phenomena:  (1)  the 
question  whether  the  natives  try  to  approxi- 
mate the  rule  system  as  we  think  that  they 
might  approximate  it;  and  (2)  the  variations, 
which  may  be  very  significant — and  not  just 
capricious.  So  both  rules  and  variations  may 
be  related  to  culture. 

Whiting:  It  seems  to  me  that  the  structure 
in  the  native’s  mind  that  corresponds  to  what, 
in  the  anthropologists’  mind,,  we  might  call  a 
model,  is  really  better  described  as  a cognitive 
view  of  the  universe  that  serves  him  as  a 
mnemonic  device  and  an  aid  to  communication 
with  other  members  of  his  own  society.  Now, 
it  is  no  more  an  empirical  matter  to  find  out 
who  marries  whom  than  it  is  to  try  to  discover 
how  much  consensus  there  is  in  a society  in  the 
cognitive  systems  that  they  espouse.  However 
the  latter  question  is  one  which  we  have  failed 
to  investigate. 

Alland:  We  have  had  a blush  of  success 
from  componential  analysis,  but  it  has  tended 
to  go  back  to  the  single  informant  approach  of 
earlier  anthropology.  This  is  unfortunate  in 
many  cases,  although  it  seems  to  work  pretty 


well  with  kinship  systems,  since  most  people 
know  their  systems  pretty  well  and  agree  on 
them.  But  I think  Whiting’s  point  is  a good 
one.  I remember  Sapir’s  story  about  the  time 
when  he  had  completely  worked  out  a system 
and  then  presented  it  to  one  of  the  Indians, 
Two  Crows,  who  told  him  that  the  system 
simply  was  not  like  that.  There  is  this  sort  of 
variation  in  system,  even  ideal  ones,  within  a 
single  society;  and  it  is  significant  to  know 
how  many  “Two  Crows”  there  are  in  any 
particular  society. 

Laughlin  : I recall  an  early  paper  by  Steve 
Hart,  published  in  the  American  Anthropologist 
(Hart,  1943)  in  the  1940’s,  in  which  he  ana- 
lyzed the  marriage  rules  for  the  Natchez 
Indians.  As  I recall,  they  had  an  exotic  system 
that  differentiated  Suns,  Honors,  Nobles,  and 
Stinkards.  And  by  purely  arithmetical  means 
he  demonstrated  that  the  system  could  not  work. 
Some  years  later,  the  mathematician  Robert 
Busch  demonstrated  again,  this  time  by  means 
of  matrix  algebra,  that  the  system  could  not 
work.  This  might  make  us  wonder  how  well 
other  systems  would  stand  a test  of  internal 
consistency — quite  apart  from  the  question  as 
to  the  conformity  of  the  people  to  the  systems. 

Lathrap:  I think  that  the  demonstrations 
just  mentioned  were  made  on  the  assumption 
that  the  system  was  intended  to  function  as  a 
closed  one,  while  the  Natchez  and  other  groups 
with  somewhat  similar  systems,  such  as  the 
Mbaya  of  the  Gran  Chaco,  were  continually 
adding  to  their  lower  class  through  conquest. 
The  details  of  the  setting  and  the  operation  of 
such  a system  must  be  taken  into  account. 

Alland:  It  seems  significant  that  this  should 
be  a model  that  cannot  work  unless  something 
unusual  happens,  which  seems  especially  im- 
portant if  we  are  studying,  say,  gene  flow. 

Sharp  : There  may  be  different  models  and 
different  kinds  of  models  that  should  have  been 
considered  here.  The  Australian  aboriginal, 
however  abstract  his  thinking  may  become,  is 
not  really  concerned  to  distinguish  between 
Dr.  Birdsell’s  linguistic  community  and  Dr. 
Alland’s  breeding  one,  which  might  include 
two  to  three  linguistic  communities.  It  is  up 
to  us  not  to  be  taken  in  by  stereotyped  con- 
structs— either  the  natives’  or  our  own — or  to 
apply  them  to  the  wrong  group  or  the  wrong 
activities. 


Discussions,  Part  IV  2 1 5 

Schieffelin:  While  there  seems  to  be  agree- 
ment on  the  fact  that  the  scientist’s  model  is 
not  identical  to  that  in  the  native’s  mind,  it  has 
not  yet  been  seriously  asked  whether  the 
native’s  construct  is  even  the  same  sort  of 
thing  as  the  anthropologist’s  model.  We  appear 
to  assume  that  the  native  does  live  in  accor- 
dance with  some  sort  of  system  of  explicit  and 
implicit  beliefs  to  be  brought  out  by  careful 
questioning;  while  it  may  well  be  that,  in  fact, 
the  native  synthesizes  and  systematizes  his 
beliefs  for  the  very  first  time  in  the  act  of  ex- 
plaining them  to  the  anthropologist.  It  might 
be  useful  to  look  at  the  “model”  in  the  native’s 
mind  in  the  same  way  that  Thomas  Kuhn 
(1962)  looks  at  paradigms  in  scientific  theory. 
Instead  of  being  strict  models,  according  to 
which  scientific  theories  are  elaborated,  they 
are  bodies  of  assumptions  that  are  more  or  less 
consistent  with  one  another  and  include  exem- 
plary examples,  so  to  speak. 

Pilling  : In  view  of  the  monographs  pub- 
lished on  Australia,  I might  stress  the  impor- 
tance of  graphic  representations  of  “models,” 
which  the  aborigines  often  make  in  the  sand 
(in  circumstances  which  suggest  that  such 
graphic  representations  are  not  a new,  accul- 
turative  phenomenon).  In  studying  some  of 
these,  I found  that  they  were  of  a very  different 
nature  from  the  anthropologist’s  presentation 
of  the  same  material.  As  ethnographers,  we 
ought  to  be  certain  that  we  do  not  overlook 
the  aid  to  be  had  from  these  graphic  represen- 
tations as  supplements  to  the  verbal  explana- 
tions. 

Levi-Strauss  : I would  like  to  cite  an 
example  of  the  clarity  of  the  model  that  some- 
times is  to  be  found  in  the  mind  of  the  native. 
One  of  my  students  has  just  returned  from 
Africa,  where  she  studied  a Voltaic  people  with 
a kinship  system  of  the  Crow-Omaha  type  (but 
with  bilateral  descent  and,  accordingly, 
numerous  clan  interdictions).  Now,  the  use  of 
the  terms  is  extremely  complicated,  and  in 
order  to  explain  why  in  describing  a certain 
degree  of  kinship  they  use  one  term  rather  than 
another,  the  natives  expounded  a set  of  rules 
resembling  very  much  those  developed  by 
Lounsbury  in  his  analysis  of  the  Crow-Omaha 
system  (Lounsbury,  1964).  Is  it  not  striking 
that  Lounsbury,  by  sophisticated  techniques  of 
analysis,  should  have  actually  rediscovered 


2 1 6 Marriage  and  Models  in  Australia 

rules  that  do  exist  in  the  mind  of  a native  in  a 
quite  different  part  of  the  world? 

22d.  Statistics  of  Kin 

Marriage:  A Non-Australian  Example 

Speaker:  Helm 

Helm  : The  bulk  of  our  discussion  today  has 
concerned  marriage  among  Australian  abori- 
gines. It  hardly  needs  saying  that  the  Austra- 
lians are  not  the  only  hunter-gatherers  who 
marry,  nor  are  they  the  only  ones  who  exhibit 
cross-cousin  marriage.  To  broaden  the  pers- 
pective it  may  be  useful  to  consider  marriage 
data  from  other  areas. 

I present  part  of  the  results  of  an  effort  to 
identify  kin-pattern  in  marriages  among  the 
Hare  Indians.  The  Athapaskan  Hare  live  near 
the  Arctic  circle  in  western  Canada  and  have 
numbered  around  300  for  the  last  several 
generations.  In  my  few  weeks  with  the  Hare 
in  1957,  I found  Iroquois  cousin  terms,  termi- 
nological equivalence  of  father’s  sister  and 
mother’s  brother  with  mother-in-law  and 
father-in-law,  and  the  apparent  fact  that  terms 
for  cross-cousins  of  opposite  sex  derive  from 
husband  and  wife  terms.  These  forms  suggested 
that,  at  least  in  the  past,  cross-cousin  marriage 
might  be  practiced  (MacNeish,  1960a).  In  a 
subsequent  study  of  the  Hare,  Hiroko  Sue 
(1964,  p.  424)  indicates  that  first  cross-cousin 
marriage  was  formerly  the  preferred  type  and 
that  “more  distant  cross-cousins  do  marry  each 
other.” 

In  considering  the  Hare  material,  the  mar- 
riage patterns  and  terminology  systems  of 
Northern  Algonkians  (Cree,  Northern  Ojib- 
wa,  Naskapi)  came  to  mind  as  immediate 
models  (see  Eggan,  1955,  pp.  519  ff.).  Hallo- 
well  and  Dunning,  for  example,  have  given  us 
quantified  data  on  kin-connected  marriages  in 
two  Northern  Ojibwa  groups  (with  populations 
comparable  in  size  to  the  Hare).  Although  at 
pains  to  point  out  that  persons  falling  in  the 
“marriageable”  class  may  be  distant  relatives 
of  Ego,  Hallowell  and  Dunning  demonstrate 
that  consanguineal  first  and  second  cross- 
cousin marriages  are  high.  Such  marriages 
comprised  40.8  per  cent  of  three  generations  of 
marriages  among  the  Island  Lake  Salteaux 


(Hallowell,  1937,  pp.  98,  101)  and  50.0  per 
cent  of  the  marriages  taking  place  among  the 
Pekangekum  Ojibwa  in  a five-year  interval  in 
the  1950’s  (Dunning,  1959,  p.  154).  The  kin- 
ship terminology  system  of  the  Hare  differs 
from  the  cited  Northern  Ojibwa  groups  only 
in  that  sibling-in-law  categories  are  identified 
by  distinct  terms.  In  his  comparative  analysis 
of  Algonkian  terminology  systems,  Eggan 
(!955,  p.  529)  argues  that  “separation  of 
siblings-in-law  from  cross-cousins  is  an  impor- 
tant marker  in  the  breakdown  of  cross-cousin 
marriage”  and  for  several  cases  suggests  “white 
acculturation”  as  a critical  factor.  If  the  dis- 
tinct sibling-in-law  terms  in  the  Hare  system 
represent  an  acculturative  shift,  then  a reason- 
able expectation,  by  analogy  from  the  Algon- 
kian material,  is  that  marriages  in  earlier 
generations  at  least  would  show  a fair  incidence 
of  consanguine  cross-cousin  marriage  of  first 
and  second  degree. 

Data  on  Hare  genealogies  and  all  marriages 
from  the  beginning  of  the  Mission  Period  (that 
is,  i860)  were  available  to  me  through  the 
records  of  the  Oblate  missionaries.  The  mar- 
riages of  almost  1 ,000  individuals  were  re- 
corded. The  genealogical  and  marital  data 
were  subjected  to  computer  processing.  Given 
sufficient  data,  the  computer  yields  a print-out 
of  all  chains  of  primary  consanguineal  and/or 
affinal  links  to  the  tenth  remove  that  may 
obtain  between  spouses.1  For  457  Hare  mar- 
riages falling  within  the  interval  between  1890 
and  1956,  there  was  sufficient  genealogical 
background  to  demonstrate  all  linkages  be- 
tween the  spouses. 

The  computer  print-out  revealed  that  almost 
every  Hare  was  linked,  within  ten  or  less  re- 
moves, to  his  partner  in  several  or  many  ways 
(maximum:  148)  if  affinal  connections  are 
included.  But  the  surprising  result  was  that 
only  35  or  7.6  per  cent  of  the  marriages  were 
between  consanguines.  Out  of  these  there  were 
twelve  cases — 2.4  per  cent  of  all  marriages — of 
consanguineal  cousin  marriage,  all  between 
second  cousins.  Eleven  of  the  twelve  were 
terminologically  “cross-cousins.”  Compare  this 
with  the  40  to  50  per  cent  of  first  and  second 

1.  I am  indebted  to  Allan  Goult  (then  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  California  at  Davis)  and  his  associates,  who 
developed  the  computer  program  and  ran  the  Hare  data 
for  me. 


cross-cousin  marriages  in  the  two  Ojibwa 
populations  cited  above. 

The  rates  of  consanguineal  marriages 
through  six  and  a half  decades  (1890  to  1956) 
remain  remarkably  constant  for  the  Hare. 
However,  half  of  the  second-cousin  marriages 
(six)  occurred  in  the  first  two  decades.  In  sum, 
it  appears  that  the  Hare  suppress  marriage 
between  consanguines,  and  did  so  at  a period 
when  it  is  very  unlikely  that  white  accultura- 


Discussions,  Part  IV  2 1 7 

tive  press  would  have  had  much  effect.  Speci- 
fically, if  it  were  simply  a matter  of  choosing 
among  a number  of  kin-types,  including  con- 
sanguineal cross-cousins,  that  fall  within  the 
class  of  “marriageable  relative,”  distant  or 
near,  the  Hare  should  come  considerably  closer 
to  approaching  the  proportions  of  first  and 
second  cross-cousin  marriages  found  among 
the  Ojibwa  groups  reported  by  Hallowell  and 
Dunning. 


Part  V 

Demography  and  Population  Ecology 


23- 


Epidemiological  Factors : 

Health  and  Disease  in  Hunter-Gatherers 

FREDERICK  L.  DUNN 


Introduction 

A series  of  generalizations  concerning  health, 
disease,  and  mortality  in  hunter-gatherers  are 
reviewed  and  discussed  in  this  paper.  Some  are 
long-established  and  widely  accepted;  others 
are  proposed  in  the  light  of  certain  considera- 
tions of  ecological  diversity  and  complexity.  I 
shall  refer  particularly  to  the  published  record 
for  health  and  disease  in  the  Bushman,  the 
Australian  aborigine,  the  Eskimo,  the  African 
Pygmy,  and  the  Semang  (Malayan  Negrito). 
In  the  course  of  the  discussion  some  epidemio- 
logical or  “medical  ecological”  issues  will  be 
raised  which  pertain  to  the  study  of  diseases: 
(i)  as  agents  of  natural  selection,  and  (2)  as 
dependent  or  independent  variables  influenc- 
ing size  and  stability  of  human  populations.  I 
shall  emphasize  the  role  of  disease  in  population 
regulation  rather  than  in  selection,  but  much 
that  will  be  said  relates  to  both  areas  of  in- 
quiry. Disease — particularly  parasitic  and  in- 
fectious disease — has  attracted  considerable 
attention  from  human  geneticists  apd  anthro- 
pologists in  recent  years  (Livingstone,  i960; 
Motulsky,  i960;  Neel  et  al.,  1964;  World 
Health  Organization,  1968)  but  the  role  of 
disease  in  population  regulation  has  been 
somewhat  neglected. 

Whether  one’s  concern  may  be  the  destiny 


of  the  modern  hunter-gatherer  or  the  recon- 
struction of  prehistoric  hunting  and  gathering 
conditions,  hunter-gatherer  studies  are  really 
urgent  today.  This  urgency  is  emphasized  in 
a succinct  World  Health  Organization  report, 
“Research  on  human  population  genetics” 
(1968),  which  also  outlines  research  needs, 
procedures,  and  the  kinds  of  demographic, 
ethnographic,  genetic,  and  biomedical 
data  whose  collection  is  so  essential.  These 
procedural  matters  need  not  be  discussed  here, 
but  a brief  review  of  the  means  available  for 
gathering  data  and  developing  a picture  of 
disease  patterns  in  prehistoric  hunter-gatherers 
may  be  useful.  Only  four  approaches  come  to 
mind : 

1.  We  may  study  health  and  disease  in 
modern  hunter-gatherers  and  project  these 
findings  into  the  past.  This  approach  assumes 
that  disease  patterns  in  populations  still  re- 
moved from  substantial  contact  with  outsiders 
are  to  some  extent  similar  to  ancient  disease 
patterns.  The  extensive  pilot  study  of  the 
Xavante  Indians  of  the  Brazilian  Mato  Grosso 
by  Neel  and  his  colleagues  (1964)  is  a good 
example.  Their  report  provides  some  tentative 
hypotheses  of  human  genetic  and  evolutionary 
interest ; many  indications  exist  that  additional 
studies  along  the  same  lines  may  also  provide 
data  of  value  in  the  interpretation  of  prehistoric 


221 


222  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

populations  and  demographic  conditions. 

2.  We  may  review  first-contact  records — 
historical  and  ethnographic  within  this  century 
— for  information  about  specific  diseases  and 
conditions  of  health.  Much  of  our  knowledge 
of  aboriginal  health  conditions  in  the  Americas 
has  been  built  up  in  this  way  (Cook,  1955,  for 
example). 

3.  We  may  make  use  of  increasing  refine- 
ment of  archeological  technique  and  extensive 
multidisciplinary  collaboration  in  archeologi- 
cal investigations,  which  are  beginning  to  pro- 
vide extraordinary  dividends  in  knowledge  of 
the  prehistoric  environment.  Paleoecological 
studies  now  make  it  possible  to  assess  prehistoric 
environmental  potentials  for  transmission  of 
infectious  and  parastic  agents  of  disease.  Paleo- 
pathological  investigations  are  becoming  in- 
creasingly sophisticated,  and  coprolite  studies, 
which  also  provide  valuable  dietary  and  ecolo- 
gical information,  have  opened  the  way  to 
epidemiological  assessment  of  intestinal  hel- 
minthiases in  prehistoric  populations  (Callen 
and  Cameron,  i960;  Samuels,  1965).  Recently, 
in  collaboration  with  Dr.  Robert  Heizer  of  the 
University  of  California  I have  had  the  oppor- 
tunity to  study  a series  of  more  than  fifty 
coprolites  from  Lovelock  Cave  in  Nevada.  We 
found  no  eggs  or  larvae  of  parasitic  helminths, 
but  because  of  the  extraordinary  state  of  pre- 
servation of  certain  pseudoparasites — mites 
and  nematodes — we  were  able  to  conclude, 
with  a fair  degree  of  certainty,  that  the  ancient 
people  represented  by  these  specimens  were  in 
fact  free  of  a whole  series  of  intestinal  helminths, 
including  flukes,  tapeworms,  and  important 
nematodes  such  as  hookworm  and  Ascaris.  This 
conclusion  was  not  altogether  surprising  in  the 
light  of  our  knowledge  of  helminthiasis  in 
modern  Bushmen  and  other  hunter-gatherers 
of  arid  regions. 

4.  We  may  finally  approach  the  study  of 
prehistoric  patterns  of  disease  in  man  through 
the  study  of  disease  patterns  in  non-human 
primates  today  in  a variety  of  ecological  set- 
tings, some  of  which  are  shared  with  modern 
hunter-gatherers  (Dunn  MS-i,  1966).  In  this 
relatively  unexplored  field  we  can  only  expect 
to  discern  broad  patterns  of  similarity  for  man 
and  other  primates.  I shall  return  briefly  to 
this  approach  when  I discuss  ecological  com- 
plexity and  diversity. 


Disease  in  the  Population  Equation 

To  examine  the  role  of  disease  in  a human 
population,  we  may  refer  to  the  “equation  of 
recruitment  and  loss”  of  Wynne-Edwards 
(1962),  defining  the  variables  contributing  to 
the  condition  of  population  stability: 

Recruit-  + Immi-  = Uncon-  + Emi-  + Social 
ment  gration  trollable  gration  Mortality 

Arising  Losses 

from  Re- 
production 

In  this  equation,  “uncontrollable  losses”  are 
identified  as  the  independent  variable  and 
include  losses  due  to  predation,  parasitism 
(infectious  and  parasitic  diseases),  accidents, 
starvation  and  old  age  (chronic  diseases, 
diseases  associated  with  aging).  Social  mortality 
comprises  that  mortality  arising  from  “social 
stress” : strife,  stress  diseases,  cannibalism, 
infanticide,  war,  homicide,  suicide,  etc.  Wynne- 
Edwards,  with  an  acknowledgement  to  Carr- 
Saunders  (1922),  discusses  population  stability 
in  hunter-gatherer  and  subsistence  agricul- 
turalist societies  in  terms  of  this  equation.  Births 
and  immigration  are  balanced  by  emigration 
and  two  kinds  of  mortality,  the  socially  con- 
trollable (social  mortality)  and  the  socially 
uncontrollable  (losses  due  to  independent 
variables).  Within  the  realm  of  controllable 
(sometimes  even  “acceptable”)  mortality  is 
population  regulation  by  abortion  and  infan- 
ticide, by  reduction  in  numbers  (sacrifice, 
cannibalism,  head-hunting  and  other  forms  of 
warfare,  geronticide,  and  even  homicide  and 
suicide),  and  by  territoriality  (rules  regulating 
the  utilization  of  space  and  resources,  land 
tenure,  marriage  regulations,  etc.).  In  a brief 
discussion  of  mortality  due  to  predation  and 
disease,  Wynne-Edwards  points  out  that 
neither  of  these  variables  can  be  considered 
wholly  density-dependent  or  density-indepen- 
dent. Predation  not  only  contributes  to  uncon- 
trollable loss  but  is  also  density-dependent 
insofar  as  the  prey  may  “cooperate”  in  making 
its  surplus  members  available  to  predators. 
Similarly,  infectious  and  parastic  diseases  may 
be  either  uncontrollable  or  density-dependent, 
as  socially  stressed  individuals  are  selected  out 
by  disease  because  of  their  “depressed”  physio- 
logical state.  Thus,  as  variables  contributing 
to  mortality,  predation  and  disease  due  to 
parasitism  are  to  some  extent  controllable  and 


Dunn  Epidemiological  Factors : Health  and  Disease  in  Hunter-Gatherers  223 


density-dependent,  to  some  extent  uncontrol- 
lable and  independent.  The  disease  variable 
is  obviously  important  in  the  regulation  of 
human  population  but  its  impact  is  constantly 
modified  by  sociocultural  and  ecological  fac- 
tors. Other  variables  in  the  demographic 
equation — notably  accidents,  predation,  and 
certain  forms  of  social  mortality — may  affect 
population  size  more  profoundly  than  disease 
in  certain  settings. 

Mortality  and 

Disease  in  Hunter-Gatherers 

Some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  hunting  and 
gathering  way  of  life  (as  seen  today  and  in 
historic  times)  that  may  influence  the  pre- 
valence and  distribution  of  various  diseases 
and  other  causes  of  mortality  are  these:  the 
size  of  the  social  group  is  small,  and  contact 
between  groups  is  limited,  in  part  because  of 
the  relatively  large  area  needed  to  support 
each  small  population  unit;  the  group  utilizes 
environmental  resources  intensively  but  with 
minimal  permanent  disturbance  of  the  environ- 
ment; the  individuals  are  well  adapted  to  the 
conditions  of  the  ecosystem  in  which  they 
belong;  the  individual  lives  in  intimate  contact 
with  his  fellows  and  the  environment;  the 
group  is  characteristically  mobile,  within  cer- 
tain territorial  limits;  dwellings  are  often  rudi- 
mentary or  temporary;  the  dietary  range  is 
relatively  wide,  at  least  potentially — less  desir- 
able foods  are  available  as  a reserve  for  times 
of  hardship;  in  general  the  diet  may  be  said 
to  be  well  balanced  in  the  sense  that  minimal 
nutritional  requirements  are  apparently  met; 
in  the  tropics  and  subtropics  the  vegetable 
component  of  the  diet  normally  exceeds  the 
animal  component  in  quantity  if  not  in  quality ; 
in  the  arctic  and  in  certain  maritime  and 
riverine  settings  the  animal  component  may 
bulk  larger  than  the  vegetable;  occupational 
specialization  except  along  lines  of  age  and  sex 
is  relatively  slight. 

With  these  characteristics  in  mind  we  may 
consider  some  generalizations  about  health, 
disease,  and  mortality  in  hunting  and  gathering 
peoples  (prehistoric,  precontact,  or  isolated 
modern  population). 

1 . Patent  (and  perhaps  even  borderline)  mal- 


nutrition is  rare.  We  should  expect  this  in 
stable,  well-adapted  hunter-gatherer  popula- 
tions, modern  or  prehistoric.  Dietary  resources, 
even  in  arid  environments,  are  diverse : typical 
sampling  of  these  resources  by  modern  hunter- 
gatherers  in  ecosystems  relatively  undisturbed 
by  outsiders  seems  to  provide  at  least  the 
minimal  protein,  carbohydrate,  fat,  mineral, 
and  vitamin  requirements.  Many  workers  have 
commented  on  the  relatively  good  nutritional 
status  of  hunter-gatherers  in  comparison  with 
neighboring  agriculturalists  or  urban  dwellers 
(for  example:  Ackerknecht,  1948;  Maingard, 
1 937 i Turnbull,  1965b;  Woodburn,  1959). 
Neel  (1962)  postulated  a dramatic  gorging- 
and-fasting  way  of  life  for  hunter-gatherers 
through  “99  percent  of  hominid  existence”  in 
developing  his  hypotheses  of  the  “thrifty” 
diabetic  genotype.  In  the  light  of  recent  studies 
of  the  Bushman  (Lee,  1965),  this  portrayal  of 
major  fluctuations  in  the  quantity  and  quality 
of  the  hunter-gatherer  diet  is  probably  some- 
what exaggerated. 

2.  Starvation  occurs  infrequently.  While  hunter- 
gatherers  are  rarely  exposed  to  relative  dietary 
deficiencies  leading  to  malnutrition,  they  may, 
exceptionally,  be  faced  with  gross  deficits.  In 
tropical  and  temperate  regions  of  moderate  to 
heavy  rainfall,  starvation  has  undoubtedly 
been  the  exception,  occurring  only  in  indivi- 
duals incapacitated  for  other  reasons  (Turn- 
bull,  1965b).  In  the  arid  tropics  only  an 
unusually  prolonged  drought  may  be  expected 
to  imperil  the  food  supply,  but  failure  of  the 
water  supply  may  select  out  the  aged  and  sick 
before  gross  food  shortages  can  have  their 
effect.  In  the  arctic  and  subarctic  winter,  on 
the  other  hand,  starvation  has  probably  always 
been  a relatively  important  cause  of  death 
(Ackerknecht,  1948).  In  general  it  seems  that 
agriculturalists,  more  or  less  dependent  on  one 
or  several  staple  crops,  are  more  liable  to  food 
supply  failure  and  famine  than  are  hunters  and 
gatherers.  Famine  risk  may  even  be  increased 
as  the  effects  of  dry  seasons  are  exaggerated 
through  agricultural  modification  of  the  natural 
vegetational  cover. 

3.  Chronic  diseases,  especially  those  associated 
with  old  age,  are  relatively  infrequent.  Birth  rates 
arc  high,  but  the  population  pyramid  for 
hunter-gatherers  is  broad  only  at  the  base 
because  life-expectancy  at  birth  is  low  for 


224  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

males  and  even  lower  for  females  (Ackerknecht, 
1948;  Krogman,  1939;  Krzwicki,  1934;  Neel 
et  al.,  1964;  Polunin,  1953;  Roney,  1959). 
Shorter  female  life  expectancies  presumably 
reflect  maternal  losses  in  childbirth,  stresses 
associated  with  multiple  pregnancies  and 
deliveries,  and  in  certain  cultures  male-female 
dietary  disparities.  Although  life  expectancies 
of  hunter-gatherers  are  low  by  modern  Euro- 
pean or  American  standards,  they  compare 
favourably  with  expectancies  for  displaced 
hunter-gatherers,  many  subsistence  agricul- 
turalists, and  impoverished  urbanized  people 
of  the  tropics  today  (Ackerknecht,  1948; 
Billington,  i960;  Duguid,  1963;  Dunn,  MS-i; 
Maingard,  1937;  Polunin,  1953).  Few  hunter- 
gatherers  survive  long  enough  to  develop 
clinical  cardiovascular  disease  or  cancer,  major 
causes  of  mortality  in  America  and  Europe 
today.  These  diseases  do  occur  infrequently, 
however,  and  preclinical  manifestations  of 
cardiovascular  disorder  may  be  detected  in 
such  populations  (Mann  et  al.,  1962).  Occa- 
sional writers  have  claimed  that  certain  primi- 
tive populations  are  “cancer-free”  or  “heart 
disease-free,”  but  sound  evidence  to  support 
such  contentions  is  lacking,  and  evidence  to 
the  contrary  has  been  steadily  accumulating. 
Chronic  diseases  of  early  onset,  including  gene- 
tic disorders,  do  of  course  occur  regularly  in 
all  human  populations;  upon  survey  the  more 
severe  of  these  appear  less  frequent  in  hunter- 
gatherers,  probably  because  prolonged  survival 
of  incapacitated  individuals  is  less  likely  in 
mobile  than  in  settled  situations.  Such  persons 
have  sometimes  been  abandoned  or  killed, 
particularly  in  the  Arctic  (Ackerknecht,  1948). 

4.  Accidental  and  traumatic  death  rates  vary 
greatly  among  hunter-gatherer  populations.  It  is 
sometimes  said  that  accidents  constitute  a 
major  cause  of  death  in  hunting  and  gathering 
societies.  Although  this  is  indeed  the  case  for 
certain  peoples,  it  is  not  universally  true  for 
all  hunter-gatherers,  past  and  present.  Deaths 
due  to  drowning,  burns,  suffocation,  exposure, 
and  hunting  accidents  have  probably  always 
weighed  heavily  in  the  population  equation 
for  Eskimos  and  other  peoples  of  polar  and 
subpolar  regions  (Ackerknecht,  1948;  Hughes, 
1965;  World  Health  Organization,  1963).  The 
Australian  aborigines  and  Bushmen,  on  the 
other  hand,  cannot  often  drown  or  suffocate 


or  fall  from  trees,  and  are  physiologically 
tolerant  of  an  environment  that  is  climatically 
“constant”  compared  to  that  of  the  Eskimo. 
Turnbull  (1965b)  has  recently  commented  on 
the  low  incidence  of  accidental  injuries  and 
deaths  among  the  Mbuti  Pygmies.  He  recorded 
falls  from  trees,  falls  into  campfires,  attacks  by 
animals,  falling  on  a spear,  bee  stings,  and 
snakebites  as  Congo  forest  hazards.  Similarly, 
Billington  (i960)  noted  the  infrequent  occur- 
rence of  trauma  among  “settled”  aborigines  in 
Arnhem  Land.  Paleopathologists  have  never- 
theless demonstrated  abundant  traumatic 
pathology  in  skeletal  series  for  certain  hunters 
and  agriculturalists;  most  of  these  series  have 
been  recovered  from  archeological  sites  outside 
the  tropics. 

5.  Predation,  excluding  snakebite,  is  a minor 
cause  of  death  in  modern  hunter-gatherers ; predation 
may  have  been  relatively  more  important  in  the  past. 
Haldane  (1957)  and  Motulsky  (i960)  suggest 
that  through  much  of  hominid  evolution  pre- 
dation and  other  selective  agencies  were  far 
more  important  than  infectious  and  parasitic 
diseases,  which  became  major  agents  of  natural 
selection  only  after  the  introduction  of  agricul- 
ture with  its  concomitant  increases  in  popula- 
tion density,  community  size,  and  community 
contact.  Livingstone  (1958)  has  provided  an 
interpretation  of  sickle  cell  gene  distribution 
in  West  Africa  that  supports  such  an  hypo- 
thesis, but  little  other  evidence  is  available  at 
this  time  to  assist  us  in  evaluating  Haldane’s 
suggestion.  We  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility 
(a  strong  probability,  in  my  opinion)  that  some 
infectious  and  parasitic  diseases  were  important 
selective  agencies  in  prehistoric  hunting  and 
gathering  populations,  as  they  undoubtedly 
are  and  have  been  in  modern  hunter-gatherer 
societies.  Other  parasites  and  microorganisms 
have  undoubtedly  become  important  in  selec- 
tion only  in  recent  millenia  in  response  to 
culturally  induced  environmental  change.  We 
do  not  know  the  relative  importance  of  preda- 
tors at  various  points  in  human  evolution,  al- 
though common  sense  suggests  that  predators 
constituted  a greater  hazard  for  early  man 
than  for  modern  hunter-gatherers.  Accurate 
predation  data  for  the  great  apes  would  be  of 
interest  in  this  connection,  but  it  would  be 
rash  to  utilize  these  data  in  generalizing  about 
predation  in  early  hominid  life.  In  reviewing 


Dunn  Epidemiological  Factors : Health  and  Disease  in  Hunter-Gatherers  225 


some  of  the  literature  on  health  in  hunter- 
gatherers,  I have  come  upon  occasional  re- 
ferences to  snakebite  fatalities,  which  were 
apparently  particularly  frequent  in  Australia 
(Cleland,  1928),  but  references  to  animal 
attacks  have  been  few,  even  for  the  Arctic 
(Ackerknecht,  1948;  Turnbull,  1965b). 

6.  Mental  disorders  of  hunting  and  gathering 
peoples  have  been  so  little  investigated  that  no 
generalizations  about  incidence  can  be  justified. 
Descriptions  I have  encountered  of  presumed 
mental  disorder  have  been  presented  in  terms 
of  the  psychological  norms  of  the  observer- 
recorder  (for  example,  Cleland,  1928;  Base- 
dow, 1932).  Ackerknecht  (1948)  and  others 
have  suggested  that  the  rates  for  phobias  and 
hysteria  were  higher  for  the  precontact  Eskimo 
than  for  other  societies;  discussions  of  mental 
disorder  in  other  hunter-gatherers  usually  em- 
phasize that  mental  health  was  good,  at  least 
in  the  aboriginal  state.  Facts  to  support  such 
statements  are  essentially  non-existent.  Cawte 
and  his  colleagues  in  Australia  are  pioneering 
in  their  ethnopsychiatric  investigations  of  ac- 
culturated  and  unacculturated  aborigines.  A 
few  limited  psychological  investigations  of 
Bushmen  and  Pygmies  have  been  cited  by 
Doob  (1965). 

7.  Ample  evidence  is  available  that  “ social  mor- 
tality” has  been  and  is  significant  in  the  population 
equation  for  any  hunting  and  gathering  society.  Can- 
nibalism, infanticide,  sacrifice,  geronticide, 
head-hunting,  and  other  forms  of  warfare 
have  largely  disappeared  today,  but  the  early 
contact  records  provide  abundant  evidence  of 
the  importance  of  these  practices  in  many 
societies  (for  example,  Ackerknecht,  1948; 
Krzwicki,  1934;  Neel  et  al.,  1964;  Radcliffe- 
Brown,  1933).  Other  forms  of  social  mortality, 
such  as  homicide,  suicide,  and  stress  diseases, 
were  apparently  less  frequent  prior  to  contact; 
today  they  are  replacing  the  old  forms  and 
increasing  in  frequency  in  displaced  and  accul- 
turated  hunter-gatherers  as  in  so  many  other 
human  societies  (Doob,  1965;  Duguid,  1963; 
Hughes,  1965;  Polunin,  1953;  World  Health 
Organization,  1963). 

8.  Parasitic  and  infectious  disease  rates  of  pre- 
valence and  incidence  are  related  to  ecosystem  diversity 
and  complexity.  Although  many  of  these  diseases 
contribute  substantially  to  mortality , no  simple,  single 
generalization  is  possible  for  all  hunter- gatherers. 


A.  Introductory  comments:  Infection.  Infections 
by  microorganisms  and  parasites1  may  be 
classified  for  epidemiological  purposes  in  two 
primary  subdivisions:  asexual  infections  (orga- 
nisms reproducing  asexually)  and  sexual  infec- 
tions (organisms  with  some  form  of  sexual 
reproduction;  Macdonald,  1965).  Each  sub- 
division may  be  further  divided  into  direct  and 
indirect  categories.  An  indirect  infection  requires 
some  development  outside  the  definitive  host 
in  normal  transmission.  This  type  of  infection 
is  therefore  partially  dependent  upon  condi- 
tions of  environmental  temperature  and 
humidity;  many  but  not  all  are  specifically 
tropical. 

Asexual  infections  may  be  introduced 
into  a population  by  a single  dose  in  a single 
individual.  Multiplication  in  the  community 
occurs  most  readily  if  the  agent  is  rare  in 
that  community,  and  particularly  if  that 
agent  has  not  circulated  in  the  community 
previously.  Malaria  and  yellow  fever,  whose 
agents  are  arthropod  vector-transmitted,  are 
good  examples  of  indirect  asexual  infections. 
Direct  asexual  infections  are  numerous;  they 
include  many  of  the  common  viral  and 
bacterial  infections  of  mankind  (measles, 
smallpox,  diphtheria,  etc.).  Asexual  infections 
often  produce  partial  and  sometimes  complete 
acquired  immunity  to  repeated  infection. 

Sexual  infections  cannot  normally  be  intro- 
duced into  new  populations  by  single  doses. 
The  agents  multiply  and  maintain  themselves 
in  the  population  more  readily  if  they  occur  in 
large  numbers  in  a high  proportion  of  available 
hosts — that  is,  if  the  prevalence  rate  is  high  in 
the  community  and  if  the  intensity  of  infection 
in  the  individual  is  great.  Indirect  sexual 
infections  include  many  of  the  helminthiases: 
schistosomiasis,  filariasis,  hookworm  infection, 
etc.  Direct  sexual  infections  are  not  numerous, 
but  include  such  well-known  parasitic  hel- 
minths as  the  pinworm.  Sexual  infections 
stimulate  poor  to  partial  acquired  immunity 
at  best. 

B.  Introductory  comments:  Ecological  diversity 
and  complexity.  The  concepts  of  ecological 

1.  Parasites,  in  the  strict  sense  used  here,  comprise 
the  protozoa,  helminths,  and  ectoparasites  of  bio- 
medical importance.  Microorganisms  (or  infectious 
organisms)  include  the  viruses,  bacteria,  rickettsia,  and 
fungi. 


226  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

diversity  and  complexity  are  well  known  to 
ecologists  (Holdridge,  1965;  Odum,  1959)  but 
little  attention  has  been  paid  to  their  epi- 
demiological implications  until  recently.  The 
starting  point  for  discussion  is  the  climax 
tropical  rainforest,  which  is  characterized  by 
many  species  of  plants  and  animals  per  unit 
area  and  by  few  individuals  per  species  in  the 
same  unit  area.  A one-hectare  plot  in  the 
Brazilian  tropical  rainforest,  for  example,  con- 
tained 564  trees  (greater  than  to  cm.  diameter 
at  chest  height)  belonging  to  60  species.  Even 
the  commonest  species  was  represented  by  only 
49  individuals,  and  33  species  were  represented 
by  single  individuals  (Dobzhansky,  1950).  I 
I need  not  stress  the  contrast  with  the  tree 
species/individual  relationships  in  boreal  forest. 
As  Dobzhansky  ( 1 950)  has  said,  where  diversity 
of  inhabitants  is  great,  the  environment  is  rich 
in  adaptive  opportunities.  This  diversity  in 
climax  rain  forest  applies  not  only  to  trees,  and 
to  other  plants,  but  of  course  also  to  birds, 
snakes,  insects,  mammals,  and  many  other 
forms  of  life,  not  omitting  potential  or  actual 


vectors,  intermediate  hosts,  and  alternative 
hosts  for  infective  organisms.  We  are  now 
beginning  to  see  that  this  diversity  also  extends 
to  parasites  and  microorganisms. 

The  ratio  between  the  number  of  species  and 
the  number  of  individuals  per  species  has  been 
called  the  diversity  index  (Odum,  1959).  In  the 
tropical  rain  forest  the  diversity  index  is  high; 
wherever  man  disturbs  this  forest  the  index  is 
lower;  wherever  physical  factors  are  severe  and 
limiting,  as  in  the  Arctic,  the  desert,  or  at  high 
altitude,  the  diversity  index  is  very  low — few 
species  but  large  numbers  of  individuals  per 
species.  At  an  “edge,”  that  is,  the  line  of 
contact  between  a forest  and  a field,  the 
diversity  index  may  be  somewhat  higher  than 
on  either  side  of  the  line.  Wherever  man  has 
substantially  altered  the  environment,  and  the 
diversity  is  accordingly  low,  some  of  the  species 
represented  by  large  numbers  of  individuals 
are  commonly  called  “weeds.”  Actually  all 
plants  and  animals  (including  man)  are  weeds 
in  such  circumstances. 

The  complexity  index  recently  developed  by 


Table  1 


Complex  Ecosystem 
(example:  tropical  rain  forest) 

- Many  species  of  plants  and  animals 
-Few  individuals  per  species 

- Many  species  of  parasitic  and  infectious  organisms 
(in  man  and  in  other  animals) 

-Many  species  of  potential  vectors,  intermediate 
hosts,  and  alternative  hosts  (to  man)  for  parasitic 
and  infectious  organisms 

-Low  potential  transmission  efficiency  for  indirect 
infections 

Sexual  infections : many  kinds  due  to  many  species 
of  organisms 

Sexual  infections:  low  intensities  of  infection — low 
worm  burdens — light  infections 
-Asexual  infections : many  kinds  due  to  many  species 
of  organisms 

Direct  asexual  infections  producing  good  partial  or 
permanent  immunity:  appearing  in  human 

population  units  at  long  intervals 
-Direct  asexual  infections  producing  little  or  no 
immunity:  low  prevalence 

Indirect  asexual  infections  (except  those  producing 
substantial  immunity) : low  prevalence 
-(Also:  many  species  but  few  individuals  of  veno- 
mous and  noxious  arthropods  and  reptiles  = low 
incidence  of  bites) 


Simple  Ecosystem 

(examples:  subpolar  tundra,  desert  bush,  thorn 
woodland) 

— Few  species  of  plants  and  animals 
— Many  individuals  per  species 

— Few  species  of  parasitic  and  infectious  organisms 
(in  man  and  in  other  animals) 

— Few  species  of  potential  vectors,  intermediate 
hosts,  and  alternative  hosts  (to  man)  for  parasitic 
and  infectious  organisms 

— High  potential  transmission  efficiency  for  those  few 
indirect  infections  occurring  in  this  ecosystem 
— Sexual  infections:  few  kinds 

— Sexual  infections:  greater  intensity  of  infection — 
heavier  worm  burdens 
— Asexual  infections : few  kinds 

— Direct  asexual  infections  producing  good  partial  or 
permanent  immunity:  appearing  in  human 

population  units  at  long  intervals 
— Direct  asexual  infections  producing  little  or  no 
immunity : high  prevalence 
— Indirect  asexual  infections  (except  those  producing 
substantial  immunity)  : high  prevalence 
— (Also:  many  individuals  of  a few  species  of  veno- 
mous and  noxious  arthropods  and  reptiles  = high 
incidence  of  bites) 


Dunn  Epidemiological  Factors : Health  and  Disease  in  Hunter-Gatherers 


227 


Table  2 Parasitic  Helminths  and  Protozoa  in  Four  Hunting  and  Gathering  Peoples 

(. summarizing  all  available  records) 


Bushman 

Australian  Aborigine 

Semang 

Pygmy 

Africa 

Entire  Continent  Central  Australia  Malaya 

Africa 

Plant 

Desert 

Primarily: 

Desert 

Tropical, 

Tropical  & 

Formation 

Desert  Bush 

Desert 

Desert  Bush 

Premontane  & 

Premontane 

Thorn 

Desert  Bush 

Lower  Montane 

Rain-Forest 

Woodland 

Thorn  Woodland 

Rain-Forest 

Complexity 

5.6  or  less 

primarily  less 

5.6  or 

270-405 

270-405 

Index 

(Holdridge) 

than  5.6 

less 

No.  Species 
Helminths 

2 

6 

I 

IO 

I I 

No.  Species 
Intestinal 

1 

9 

6 

Protozoa 
No.  Species 
Blood 

I 

2 

3 

3 

Protozoa 
Total  No. 
Species 

3 

9 

I 

22 

20 

Holdridge  (1965)  provides  a measure  of  vege- 
tation complexity  (and  secondarily  of  other 
biological  complexity),  but  should  not  be  con- 
fused with  the  diversity  index.  The  complexity 
index  is  based  on  height  of  forest  stand,  basal 
area  of  stand,  number  of  trees,  and  number  of 
tree  species,  but  it  does  not  take  into  account 
the  number  of  trees  per  species.  Holdridge  has 
recently  published  a useful  classification  of 
world  plant  formations ; it  provides  complexity 
indices  for  many  of  these  formations  (Holdridge 

1965)- 

C.  Infection  and  ecological  diversity  and  com- 
plexity: hypothetical  conditions.  We  may  now 
contrast  two  “ideal”  and  undisturbed  eco- 
systems including  human  populations  of 
similar  group  sizes,  similarly  dispersed.  One  is 
complex — with  high  diversity  and  complexity 
indices;  the  other  is  simple — with  low  indices. 

D.  Generalizations:  infectious  and  parasitic 

disease  in  hunter-gatherers.  The  ideal  conditions 
outlined  for  a complex  ecosystem  are  believed 
applicable  in  any  consideration  of  infection  in 
unacculturated,  undisplaced  Congo  forest 
Pygmies  or  Malayan  Negritos  (Semang).  The 
conditions  for  a simple  ecosystem  are  presumably 
applicable  to  the  Eskimo,  the  Bushman,  or  the 
Australian  aborigine.  These  conditions  should 
also  be  relevant  in  any  epidemiological  study 


of  infection  in  non-human  primates:  in  the 
more  or  less  arboreal  rain-forest  species  on  the 
one  hand,  and  in  the  more  or  less  terrestrial 
open-country  species  on  the  other.  I have 
recently  reviewed  records  for  parasitism  in 
African  primates,  setting  the  findings  against 
the  conditions  outlined  above.  The  results  are 
consistent  with  these  conditions  (Dunn,  1966  ). 
The  epidemiological  record  for  infection  in 
hunter-gatherers  is  of  course  considerably 
“contaminated”  by  contact  with  outsiders, 
introductions  of  infections,  environmental  dis- 
turbances, and  displacements.  Careful  study  of 
historical  and  ethnographic  records  will  prob- 
ably provide  additional  data  for  examination 
against  the  hypothesized  conditions.  At  the 
moment,  however,  I can  offer  only  limited 
supporting  data  on  helminthic  and  protozoan 
parasite  species  numbers  in  four  hunting  and 
gathering  peoples  (Table ‘2).  Records  for  the 
Bushmen,  Australians,  and  Pygmies  have  been 
extracted  from  the  literature  (primarily: 
Billington,  i960;  Black,  1959;  Bronte-Stewart 
et  al.,  i960;  Casley-Smith,  1959;  Cleland, 
1928;  Crotty  and  Webb,  i960;  Heinz,  1961 ; 
Maingard,  1937;  Mann  et  al.,  1962;  Price 
et  al.,  1963).  Records  for  intestinal  protozoa 
are  probably  incomplete;  in  other  respects  the 
records  appear  adequate.  All  available  records 


228  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

for  the  Australian  continent,  representing  a 
variety  of  habitats  (mainly  arid),  are  shown  in 
one  column;  findings  for  one  nomadic  and 
isolated  population  in  Central  Australia  are 
also  shown  separately.  Semang  data  are  based 
primarily  upon  my  own  surveys  in  1962-64 
(Dunn  and  Bolton,  1963),  and  on  the  work  of 
Wharton  et  al.  (1963)  and  Polunin  (1953).  A 
few  species  of  helminths  and  intestinal  protozoa 
in  modern  acculturated,  semiurbanized  Eski- 
mos have  been  recorded,  but  I have  not  so  far 
encountered  any  records  of  parasitological 
survey  for  truly  isolated  Eskimo  populations. 

E.  Summary.  The  complexity  and  diversity 
of  the  ecosystem  must  influence — perhaps 
profoundly — the  patterning  of  infection  and 
disease  in  hunter-gatherer  populations.  Pre- 
valence, incidence,  intensity,  distribution, 
transmission  efficiency,  vector  abundance, 
intermediate  or  alternative  host  variety  and 
abundance  are  all  affected  by  these  ecological 
factors.  For  some  hunter-gatherers  many  kinds 
of  parasitic  and  infectious  diseases  may  be 
responsible  for  moderate  rates  of  morbidity 
and  mortality;  for  others  only  a few  kinds  of 
disease  may  be  responsible  for  much  morbidity, 
and  even  mortality;  some  diseases  appear  at 
long  intervals,  causing  high  mortality;  others 
are  ever  present,  causing  more  or  less  morbidity 
and  mortality  depending  on  a complex  array 
of  ecological  and  cultural  factors.  If  diseases 
caused  by  parasites  and  microorganisms  serve 
as  agents  of  natural  selection  and  population 
regulation,  then  any  patterning  of  these 
diseases  will  mirror,  or  be  mirrored  by,  similar 
patterning  of  disease-related  selection  pressures 
and  population-regulating  mechanisms. 

Conclusion 

The  hunter-gatherer  is  an  element  in  an  eco- 
system and  cannot  isolate  himself  from  his 
environment.  Little  or  no  buffering  stands 
between  him  and  the  other  components  of  the 
system.  His  relationship  to  the  land,  to  its  flora 
and  fauna,  and  to  his  fellow  man  is  intimate. 
Although  he  is  never  perfectly  adapted  to  the 
conditions  in  his  environment,  there  is  a degree 
of  adaptive  stability — of  ecological  conserva- 
tism— which  does  not  exist  in  a modern  urban 
setting.  When  forces  of  change  appear,  how- 


ever, rapid  and  profound  destabilization  may 
follow.  The  medical  sphere  today  provides 
many  examples  of  this  destabilization  among 
the  surviving  hunting  peoples  as  they  encounter 
outsiders,  lose  their  lands  to  agricultural  and 
pastoral  encroachment,  and  even  suffer  per- 
manent displacement  from  these  lands.  “New” 
diseases  and  disorders  appear,  endemic  diseases 
either  disappear  or  become  more  prevalent 
and  more  damaging  as  social  and  ecological 
change  enhances  their  transmissibility,  and 
former  causes  of  mortality  are  displaced  by 
new  causes. 

Hunters  today  do  not  live  in  wholly  abori- 
ginal or  “prehistoric”  states  of  health,  and 
historic  or  ethnographic  records  offer  little 
data  upon  which  to  base  speculations  about 
prehistoric  conditions  of  health.  We  can,  how- 
ever, take  note  of  the  patterning  of  present-day 
health  problems  among  the  surviving  hunters. 
This  patterning  is  inevitably  affected  by  the 
ecological  setting  of  the  hunting  group,  for,  as 
I have  previously  noted,  the  hunter  lives  in  a 
truly  intimate  relationship  with  his  surround- 
ings. If  we  can  determine  and  understand  the 
factors  that  contribute  to  patterning  of  diseases 
and  causes  of  death  in  modern  peoples  who  live 
in  an  unbuffered  relationship  to  their  environ- 
ment, we  can  apply  this  understanding  to  the 
interpretation  of  the  prehistoric  and  evolu- 
tionary record,  even  in  the  absence  of  know- 
ledge about  which  (specific)  diseases  may  or 
may  not  have  been  present  in  an  ancient 
population. 

A discussion  of  epidemiological  patterning 
for  the  infectious  and  parastic  diseases  has  been 
presented ; this  patterning  is  linked  to  ecological 
factors,  including  diversity  and  complexity. 
Elsewhere  in  this  review  I have  mentioned 
striking  differences  in  incidence  for  predation, 
accidents,  ^nd  other  causes  of  death  for  hunter- 
gatherers  in  various  geographical  settings.  A 
few  ecologically  linked  patterns  of  morbidity 
and  mortality  have  emerged;  others  will  no 
doubt  be  added  as  old  information  is  screened 
and  new  data  become  available.  The  findings 
already  emphasize  the  fallacy  in  generalizing 
about  “hunter-gatherers”  as  though  they  were 
some  kind  of  homogeneous  cultural-genetic- 
ecological  unity.  They  are  diverse,  their  hunting 
territories  are  diverse,  and  so  are  their  diseases 
and  ways  of  death. 


24- 


Some  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene 
Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among 
Recent  Hunter-Gatherers 

JOSEPH  B.  BIRDSELL 


Introduction 

The  conceptual  use  of  equilibrium  systems  is 
ancient  and  honorable  in  the  social  sciences. 
But  in  practice  such  systems  have  usually 
remained  at  the  level  of  diagramatic  models. 
A stable  equilibrium  system  provides  a suitable 
basis  for  prediction  from  a number  of  points  of 
view.  It  ordinarily  remains  in  a steady  state, 
or  if  displaced  returns  to  it.  An  analysis  of 
those  forces  which  contribute  to  its  balanced 
state  allows  for  the  quantification  of  the  forces 
and  encourages  the  exploration  of  the  inter- 
relations between  them.  Especially  suitable  for 
predictive  projections  are  equilibrium  systems 
whose  mean  values  show  a high  degree  of 
correlation  with  one  or  more  external  variables. 
In  the  brief  outline  below,  a series  of  equili- 
brium systems  are  discussed  which  will  assist 
directly,  or  with  further  elaboration,  in  recon- 
structing the  dynamics  and  attributes  of  pre- 
historic populations,  both  socially  and  bio- 
logically, and  in  defining  the  ecological  niche 
occupied  by  hunters  in  the  Pleistocene  period. 


The  Density  Equilibrium  System 

The  System 

Density  is  a ratio  expressing  the  relationship 
between  people  and  space.  Among  hunters  it 
is  usually  expressed  in  terms  of  the  number  of 
square  miles  or  square  kilometers  needed  to 
support  one  individual.  It  contains  the  implicit 
assumption  that  the  population  is  representa- 
tive in  numbers,  in  sex  ratio,  and  in  age  distri- 
butions. To  be  meaningful,  it  further  presumes 
an  essential  constancy  in  population  numbers; 
that  is,  neither  rapid  expansion  nor  decline  is 
involved.  For  our  purposes  it  always  refers  to 
precontact  conditions,  and  some  systematic 
form  of  reconstruction  of  numbers  and  terri- 
torial usage  will  necessarily  be  involved. 

A density  equilibrium  system  is  based  upon 
the  broad  biological  assumption  of  a balanced 
condition  in  nature  for  all  life,  including  man 
at  a hunting  and  collecting  level  of  economy. 
Short-term  oscillations  are  not  precluded,  but 
are  a necessary  part  of  the  system,  and  reflect 


229 


230  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

various  forces  applying  corrective  measures 
after  the  equilibrium  system  is  disturbed.  The 
system  is  usually  visualized  as  representing  a 
population  approaching  the  carrying  capacity 
of  a given  environment  at  their  given  level  of 
extractive  efficiency  and  pattern  of  social  be- 
havior. Among  even  the  simplest  of  peoples, 
social  factors  seem  to  operate  to  stabilize  popu- 
lation numbers  below  the  absolute  level  of 
saturation.  Where  food  resources  are  scattered 
and  generalized,  and  methods  of  food  preserva- 
tion limited  or  absent,  the  equilibrium  system 
can  be  expressed  in  rather  simple  and  direct 
terms.  Where  concentrations  of  food  allow 
specialization,  together  with  its  preservation, 
cultural  deviations  in  behavior  are  to  be 
expected. 

The  primary  force  toward  an  expansion  of 
population  numbers  is  no  more  complicated 
than  the  inherent  excessive  fertility  which 
characterizes  all  successful  species.  For  simple 
hunters,  the  intrinsic  rate  of  increase  has  been 
calculated  as  a doubling  of  numbers  per 
generation  (Birdsell,  1957)  but  this  should  be 
raised  to  a tripling  in  numbers  per  generation, 
with  the  mean  generational  interval  extended 
to  about  thirty  years.  The  depressant  forces  of 
the  system  which  balance  the  fertility  force  are 
highly  varied  and  include  all  of  the  climatic, 
biotic,  and  social  factors  which  directly  or 
indirectly  limit  human  numbers.  They  may 
exist  both  as  short  term  seasonal  forms,  involv- 
ing stochastic  variations,  as  well  as  those  of  a 
long  trend  nature.  While  the  real  depressant 
system  represents  a complex  multifactorial 
series  of  forces,  reasonable  approximations  in 
some  regions  may  be  simple  in  nature. 

The  Evidence 

The  general  nature  of  the  system  of  density 
equilibrium  has  long  been  known  to  zoologists, 
geographers,  and  anthropologists.  But  as  ex- 
pressed in  purely  qualitative  terms,  this  know- 
ledge resulted  in  few  useful  predictions.  The 
first  detailed  quantification  was  based  upon 
Australian  aboriginal  tribal  distributions  (Tin- 
dale,  1940)  as  analyzed  by  Birdsell  (1953).  A 
series  of  123  ecologically  uniform  tribal  terri- 
tories yielded  a logarithmic  relationship  with 
mean  annual  rainfall.  The  coefficient  of  curvi- 
linear correlation  reached  the  very  high  value 


of  0.8.  The  remarkable  functional  relationship 
between  rainfall  and  tribal  area  (1)  demon- 
strated the  existence  of  an  equilibrium  density 
system,  (2)  validated  the  previously  necessary 
assumption  that  these  hunters  existed  at  the 
approximate  carrying  capacity  of  the  environ- 
ment, and  (3)  with  further  analysis,  showed 
that  the  size  of  the  dialectical  tribe  statistically 
tended  toward  a constant  value  which  was 
estimated  as  approaching  500  persons.  The 
nature  of  this  density  system  allowed  statisti- 
cally accurate  predictions  for  aboriginal  Aus- 
tralia. But  it  was  pointed  out  explicitly  that 
the  constants  for  this  equation  would  change 
markedly  in  terms  of  differences  in  biota, 
environmental  variables,  and  methods  of  ex- 
tractive efficiency  for  hunters  in  other  regions. 

Two  of  my  students  have  made  similar 
analyses.  M.  Vorkapich  (unpublished)  found 
among  the  Great  Basin  Shoshoni  tribes  a 
density  equilibrium  system  comparable  to  the 
Australian  one,  with  an  equivalent  coefficient 
of  correlation  for  the  restricted  rainfall  values 
involved.  J.  Hainline  (1965)  investigated  data 
in  Micronesia  and  found  that  population  num- 
bers were  a direct  and  highly  correlated  func- 
tion of  the  land  area  in  that  region.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  someone  will  undertake  a similar 
analysis  based  on  the  scanty  remaining  African 
data. 

Some  evidence  exists  to  show  how  the  system 
operates  when  densities  have  been  reduced  well 
below  carrying  capacity.  Four  populations 
which  serve  as  models  under  these  circum- 
stances have  been  quoted  by  Birdsell  (1957) 
and  are  the  basis  for  calculating  the  intrinsic 
rate  of  increase  in  economically  simple  popula- 
tions. These  empirical  data  reveal  that  where 
unoccupied  ecological  space  exists,  the  expand- 
ing population  may  begin  to  bud  off  when 
values  from  60  to  70  per  cent  of  carrying 
capacity  are  realized.  Since  man  is  a long-lived 
mammal,  the  extrapolation  from  other  sources 
suggests  that  his  population  numbers  may 
overshoot  carrying  capacity  before  being  de- 
pressed back  to  the  long-term  equilibrium 
value. 

Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene 

1.  Pleistocene  men  everywhere  belonged  in 
a long-term  density  equilibrium  systems  for 


Birdsell  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene  Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among  Hunter-Gatherers 


which  the  constants  would  change  with  biotic, 
climactic,  and  technological  variables. 

2 . Oscillations  in  such  an  equilibrium  system 
would  quickly  be  restored  upward  to  normal 
values  by  human  fertility  factors  on  the  one 
hand,  or  depressed  when  necessary  by  the 
complex  of  forces  existing  in  the  environment. 

3.  The  intrinsic  rate  of  increase  in  man  is 
sufficiently  high  to  assure  that  depleted  num- 
bers would  be  completely  restored  within  a 
few  decades.'  In  Pleistocene  time  perspectives, 
the  recovery  was  instantaneous. 

4.  The  thrust  of  the  fertility  force  is  sufficient 
so  that  human  populations  would  tend  to 
overshoot  carrying  capacity  as  they  restore 
their  numbers  from  a depressed  condition. 

5.  While  ecologically  available  empty  space 
was  present,  whether  due  to  colonizing  of  new 
areas,  or  due  to  the  loss  of  previous  occupants, 
it  is  predicted  that  budding-off  of  colonizing 
groups  would  occur  well  below  the  density 
equilibrium  value. 

Areas  of  Needed  Research 

Starting  with  a basic  territorial  unit,  in  which 
both  food  and  water  resources  are  locally 
earned,  densities  have  a constant  meaning. 
But  as  one  proceeds  to  ecologically  more 
variable  regions,  added  factors  begin  to  com- 
plicate the  basic  concept.  Densities  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Murray  River  were  forty  times 
greater  in  fact  than  would  be  predicted  from 
the  rainfall  regression  curve.  This  is  a dramatic 
manifestation  of  the  influence  of  locally  un- 
earned water.  Marine  resources,  ranging  all 
the  way  from  sedentary  shellfish  to  free-ranging 
fish  and  pelagic  mammals,  represent  a locally 
unearned  food  resource.  Since  they  directly 
affect  human  density,  where  they  are  techno- 
logically available,  a system  must  be  devised 
to  translate  these  marine  energy  sources  into 
terms  that  are  consonant  with  purely  basic 
terrestrial  densities.  Among  the  Kaiadilt  of 
Bentinck  Island,  in  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria 
(Tindale,  1962b),  high  population  densities 
prevail,  when  measured  in  terrestrial  area,  but 
almost  all  of  their  food  resources  were  derived 
from  tidal  waters  around  the  island.  Neither 
the  statement  that  one  square  mile  of  tidal  reef 
will  support  eight  Kaiadilt,  nor  the  figures  that 
are  based  upon  one  square  mile  of  island  sur- 


231 

face  can  be  meaningfully  translated  into  the 
density  system  based  upon  inland  tribes  living 
upon  locally  earned  resources.  Where  broad 
regional  deviations  from  the  basic  ecological 
conditions  occur,  as  with  the  seasonal  avail- 
ability of  salmon,  whether  it  be  among  the 
Ainu,  or  with  the  Indians  of  the  British  Colum- 
bia Coast,  ecological  density  systems  no  doubt 
prevail,  but  they  need  redefining  to  be  equated 
with  terrestrial  ratios. 

Archeologically,  sites  based  upon  local  con- 
centrations of  food  resources  will  systematically 
be  better  represented  in  the  recovered  data 
than  will  scattered  occupancies  based  upon 
generalized  sources  of  food.  The  Pleistocene 
record  will  be  biased  heavily  in  favor  of  the 
former.  A priori,  it  would  be  difficult  to  predict 
the  number  of  elephant  bog-trap  sites  on  the 
one  hand,  or  the  migratory  pathways  that 
channeled  big  game  herds,  such  as  that  at 
Solutre,  on  the  other  hand.  Their  existence 
may  be  determined  empirically,  but  there 
remains  the  difficult  problem  of  translating 
their  ecological  impact  into  broad  regional 
density  values. 

Numerous  studies  of  subhuman  mammals 
have  shown  that  food  resources  are  not  the  sole 
determinant  of  population  densities.  Behavioral 
factors  influence  the  equilibrium  densities,  and 
under  some  conditions  become  the  critical 
factor  (Calhoun,  1962).  Even  in  aboriginal 
Australia  the  densities  attained  reflect  some 
behavioral  influences.  Research  is  urgently 
needed  among  high-density  hunters,  especially 
those  living  upon  locally  unearned  food  re- 
sources, to  determine  the  impact  of  social 
factors  upon  equilibrium  population  densities. 

Communication  Equilibrium  System 
The  System 

Density  is  an  expression  for  the  distribution  of 
people  in  space.  It  contains  no  implications  as 
to  the  nature  of  their  social  or  cultural  aggrega- 
tions in  that  space.  A priori,  spatial  distribution 
among  hunters  might  be  expected  to  fall  into 
two  polar  types.  Distance  alone  might  act  as 
an  isolating  mechanism,  so  that  variations  in 
behavior  occur  as  some  fairly  constant  function 
in  space.  On  the  other  hand,  behavioral 


232  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

patterns  might  be  nucleated  so  that  cultural  and 
social  space  take  on  a cellular  characteristic. 
Most  of  the  living  hunting  and  gathering 
peoples  for  whom  the  reasonable  precontact 
reconstructions  can  be  made,  show  a cellular 
arrangement  in  terms  of  language  variations. 
The  Australians,  the  Andamanese,  the  Kala- 
hari Bushmen,  and  even  the  territorially  diffuse 
Shoshoni  reveal  a honeycomb  pattern,  where 
dialectical  homogeneity  provides  the  best  form 
of  group  identity.  Both  the  natives  and  the 
anthropologists  have  recognized  the  dialectical 
tribe  as  a reality. 

In  its  clearest  form,  the  dialectical  tribe  lacks 
all  aspects  of  political  authority,  and  simply 
consists  of  an  aggregation  of  local  groups  in 
spatial  proximity.  The  Australian  data  show  a 
useful  constancy  in  size  for  the  dialectical  tribe, 
which  statistically  approximates  500  persons. 
This  tendency  is  independent  of  regional  varia- 
tions in  density.  Since  the  data  cover  mean  ann- 
ual rainfall  variations  from  4 inches  to  more  than 
160  inches,  the  size  of  the  dialectical  tribal  unit 
is  insensitive  to  regional  variationsin  both  clim- 
atic and  biotic  factors.  Its  primary  determinants 
are  competence  in  speech,  and  mobility  on  foot. 

Dialectical  homogeneity  at  the’simple  level 
of  hunters  may  profitably  be  viewed  as  a conse- 
quence of  the  pattern  of  density  in  face-to-face 
communications.  Involved  are  (1)  frequency 
of  interaction,  (2)  intensity  of  interaction,  (3) 
duration  of  interaction,  and  (4)  facility  of 
communication.  The  density  of  communica- 
tion defines  the  clustering  of  groups  that  will 
show  a dialectical  homogeneity.  These  vari- 
ables in  turn  are  mediated  by  the  basic  geome- 
try of  the  local  groups.  It  has  been  shown 
(Birdsell,  1958)  that  as  the  number  of  local 
groups  increases,  greater  internal  cultural  and 
linguistic  homogeneity  should  be  expected,  for 
alien  contacts  are  reduced  in  a systematic 
fashion.  Thus,  there  is  a positive  force  acting 
to  increase  the  number  of  local  groups  who 
speak  the  same  dialect1  as  a consequence  of  the 
pattern  of  communication  density.  But  the 
effect  of  isolation  by  distance  opposes  this  inte- 
grating force.  It  can  be  shown  that  given  con- 

1. Speech  is  homogeneous  within  the  dialect  tribe 
only  relative  to  other  tribes.  Very  slight  differences  can 
be  expected  between  all  of  the  local  groups  that  comprise 
the  tribe,  as  a simple  function  of  distance  as  an  isolating 
mechanism  within  the  tribe. 


stant  limits  on  personal  mobility,  in  time  the 
dialect  unit  frequently  becomes  too  large  to 
maintain  its  tribal  homogeneity.  Speech  dif- 
ferentiation proceeds  further,  and  in  time  will 
produce  tribal  separation  through  dialectical 
fragmentation.  Since  there  is  a central  tendency 
for  the  dialect  tribe  to  approximate  500  persons 
among  widely  different  groups,  such  as  Aus- 
tralians, Shoshoni,  and  Andamanese,  among 
others,  it  is  tempting  to  consider  that  this  value 
is  relatively  independent  of  both  the  local  biota 
and  the  technology  upon  which  its  extractive 
efficiency  is  based. 

Deviations  from  the  modal  value  of  500  per- 
sons in  themselves  provide  material  for  investi- 
gating those  factors  which  may  change  the 
balance  point  of  the  communication  equili- 
brium system.  In  Australia,  on  parts  of  the 
Darling  and  Murray  rivers  systems,  there  were 
several  tribes  regionally  adjacent  to  each  other 
in  which  the  size  of  the  dialectical  unit  greatly 
exceeded  the  normal  value.  Among  the  Kami- 
laroi,  the  Wiradjuri,  and  the  Worgaibon, 
tribal  numbers  are  estimated  to  have  ranged 
from  2,000  to  5,000.  In  this  same  area,  there 
is  a clue  as  to  why  dialectical  integration  may 
have  resulted  in  these  larger  groups  of  people. 
Unlike  most  regions  of  Australia,  men  in  these 
tribes  could  and  did  inherit  territorial  rights 
to  special  food  resources  in  their  mothers’ 
territory.  The  data  suggests  that  this  simple 
modification  in  jural  behavior  modified  the 
pattern  of  the  density  of  communications  so 
as  to  result  in  the  linguistic  integration  of 
unusually  large  numbers  of  local  groups.  In  a 
comparable  fashion,  among  the  Kalahari  Bush- 
men, variations  in  residence  have  been  re- 
ported in  terms  of  the  universal  bride-service 
(Marshall,  i960).  When  combined  with  an 
incipient  tendency  toward  political  authority 
vested  in  headsmen,  this  may  have  resulted  in 
the  development  of  larger  dialect  groups  there. 
These  examples  suggest  that  the  size  of  the 
dialect  units,  and  their  equilibrium  value,  may 
respond  sensitively  to  seemingly  minor  dif- 
ferences in  behavior  which  they  infringe  upon 
the  pattern  of  communication  density. 

The  Evidence 

There  are  a variety  of  data  bearing  upon  the  ex- 
istence of  the  dialectical  tribe  as  an  expression 


Birdsell  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene  Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among  Hunter -Gatherers  233 


of  the  communication  equilibrium  system. 
Its  widespread  existence,  as  in  cases  mentioned 
above  and  others,  gives  an  empirical  verifica- 
tion. It  is  a commonplace  in  Australia  that 
when  tribal  numbers  expand  to  1 ,000  or  more 
individuals,  then  dialect  fragmentation  regu- 
larly occurs.  At  the  time  of  contact  the  Aranda 
were  visibly  differentiated  into  five  dialect 
subgroups  (Strehlow,  1947)  with  a combined 
population  estimated  at  1,500  persons.  The 
Walbiri  according  to  Meggitt  (1962),  num- 
bered somewhere  between  1,000  and  1,400 
aborigines,  and  had  differentiated  into  four 
dialect  subgroups.  Those  data  suggest  that 
isolation  by  distance  begins  to  produce  recog- 
nizable dialect  fragmentation  when  tribal  size 
approaches  1,000  persons  and  that  the  dif- 
ferentiating dialect  subgroups  range  from  about 
250  to  375  in  numbers,  values  well  below  the 
equilibrium  value  of  500  persons.  In  the  Kim- 
berleys  of  Western  Australia  other  large  tribal 
groups,  such  as  the  Walmadjari  and  Njamal, 
were  in  the  process  of  linguistic  differentiation 
at  the  time  of  contact.  The  model  of  band 
interaction,  referred  to  above,  suggests  that  a 
pair  of  main  and  opposing  forces,  involving 
cultural  cohesion  and  isolation  by  distance, 
tend  to  maintain  the  equilibrium  numbers  in 
a fairly  rigid  manner. 

Finally,  in  an  experiment  in  nature  (Birdsell, 
MS-i),  it  can  be  shown  that  after  the  size  of 
the  Australian  tribe  has  been  abruptly  reduced 
in  numbers  (but  with  no  reduction  in  density), 
there  follows  in  time  a regular  reintegration, 
presumably  in  terms  of  local  groups,  until  the 
full  and  normal  number  of  500  persons  is  re- 
stored for  the  dialect  tribe.  The  social  disloca- 
tion in  this  case  involves  tribal  names  and 
identity  rather  than  dialect  differentiation. 
The  form  of  the  restoring  curve  is  heavily 
damped,  with  no  tendency  to  overshoot  the 
equilibrium  value.  This  is  what  one  would 
expect  in  terms  of  a system  whose  values  are 
primarily  determined  by  the  overall  density 
of  communication. 

Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene 

1.  Pleistocene  populations  will  ordinarily  be 
expected  to  be  arranged  in  tribal  units  marked 
off  by  dialect  differences.  If  exceptions  are  to 
be  postulated,  they  should  be  based  upon  some 


influence  which  tends  to  minimize  distance  as 
an  isolating  factor,  such  as  a concentration  of 
food  resources. 

2.  In  a statistical  sense,  the  central  tendency 
for  the  size  of  the  dialect  tribe  in  the  Pleistocene 
can  be  estimated  as  500  persons,  although  the 
variance  will  be  considerable.  This  is  based 
upon  the  value  among  a variety  of  living 
hunters  and  gatherers  showing  a wide  range  of 
variations  in  extractive  technology,  biota,  and 
other  ecological  variables.  There  is  no  reason 
why  this  estimate  should  not  be  pushed  as  far 
back  into  the  Pleistocene  as  the  development 
of  fully  symbolic  speech  and  foot  mobility 
would  allow. 

3.  While  much  individual  variation  in  the 
size  of  the  dialect  tribe  will  occur  in  the 
Pleistocene,  as  in  the  present,  those  which  be- 
come too  numerous  will  be  subject  to  linguistic 
differentiation  and  division,  while  those  which 
decline  below  a critical  number  will  be  forced 
into  amalgamation  with  others,  since  they 
would  reach  a position  of  instability  in  the 
equilibrium  system. 

Research  Needed 

A linguistic  analysis  of  the  degree  of  difference 
between  the  dialects  which  form  tribal  groups 
is  badly  needed.  While  the  native  informants 
themselves  recognize  varying  degrees  of  dif- 
ference, these  will  not  become  materials  for 
further  analysis  until  they  are  linguistically 
standardized.  There  is  even  some  question 
whether  dialect  tribal  groups  are  always  de- 
fined at  the  same  level  of  difference.  Are  the 
much  larger  groups  found  among  Kalahari 
Bushmen  real,  meaning  that  the  linguistic 
differentiation  is  at  the  same  level,  or  has  a 
different  measure  of  language  differentation 
been  used  there  than  in  Australia  and  else- 
where ? Linguistic  controls,  are  obviously 
needed  to  answer  questions  like  this.  It  would 
be  helpful  further  to  determine  the  degree  of 
linguistic  differentiating  normal  among  the 
local  groups  which  comprise  the  dialect  tribe. 

There  exist,  in  the  voluminous  ethnological 
data  upon  Australians,  almost  no  details  which 
can  be  used  to  investigate  and  elaborate  the 
variables  which  make  up  the  overall  density 
of  communication.  While  most  writers  report 
that  initiation  ceremonies  exist,  they  never 


234  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

report  the  interval  in  years  between  them,  the 
recruitment,  composition  and  origin  of  the 
visiting  parties,  how  far  they  had  traveled,  or 
other  factors  of  importance.  Models  serve  as 
guides  for  this  sort  of  investigation,  but  they 
can  only  be  tested  and  refined  against  good 
empirical  data.  It  is  too  late  to  hope  for  the 
critical  data  from  the  Australia  of  today,  so 
they  must  be  recorded  for  other  economically 
simple  groups  which  are  still  functioning. 

Local  Group  Equilibrium  Systems 

The  System 

Just  as  most  terrestrial  vertebrates  have  evolved 
patterns  of  behavior  which  result  in  their 
efficient  distribution  in  space  to  maximize 
population  survival  probabilities,  so  have  men 
at  a hunting  and  gathering  level  of  economy. 
Human  behavior  is  both  generally  adaptive 
and  conveniently  flexible  so  that  the  composi- 
tion of  the  local  territorial  group  and  the  de- 
tails of  its  relations  with  neighboring  groups 
can  be  expected  to  vary.  There  is  no  need  to 
consider  the  rigidly  ideal  model  constructed 
by  Hiatt  (1962)  and  criticized  with  complete 
competence  by  Stanner  (1965).  Local  group 
functioning  and  structure  have  seldom  been 
observed  in  undisturbed  density  equilibrium 
systems,  although  a few  data  do  exist.  In 
general,  their  characteristics  must  be  recon- 
structed through  a detailed  and  conscientious 
evaluation  of  precontact  food  resources,  surface 
water  availabilities,  and  group  compositions. 
This  is  a most  difficult  task,  for  local  group 
structure  and  function  are  the  first  things  to 
disappear  in  the  contact  situation. 

Using  Australian  aborigines  as  models,  some 
general  attributes  of  the  modal  type  of  local 
group  can  be  defined.  It  will  tend  to  consist  of 
a suitably  sized  group  of  genealogically  related 
families.  Anthropologists  have  noted  and 
models  confirm  (Birdsell,  MS-3)  that  the 
variety  of  possible  relationships  is  both  great 
and  will  change  with  time.  The  type  of  food 
resources  is  perhaps  the  most  important  single 
determinant  of  local  group  size  and  composi- 
tion. Where  plant  and  animal  resources  are 
largely  raised  locally  and  comprise  wide  variety 
of  forms,  the  size  of  the  exploitive  groups  will 


be  small,  and  figures  tend  to  oscillate  around 
an  equilibrium  value  of  25  persons.  Such 
groups  are  almost  universally  exogamous,  al- 
though Tindale  (1962b)  has  fouhd  an  interest- 
ing exception,  which  is  to  be  explained  by  the 
unique  circumstances  in  which  it  occurs. 

Where  food  resources  are  more  concentrated, 
the  dietary  becomes  more  specialized  and  local 
group  structure  frequently  changes.  It  should 
be  stressed  that  this  is  not  a consequence  of 
increasing  density,  but  rather  a function  of 
concentration.  In  such  circumstances  the  aver- 
age size  of  local  groups  may  range  between  50 
and  100  individuals,  and  in  some  exceptional 
cases  reach  several  hundred  persons.  But  it  is 
to  be  noted  that  the  reality  of  such  groups  can 
be  reconstructed  only  where  sufficient  food  and 
water  resources  can  be  systematically  demons- 
strated  by  detailed  data.  This  has  not  been 
done,  for  example,  by  either  Meggitt  (1962) 
or  Elkin  (1962)  for  the  Walbiri  of  central 
desert  Australia.  This  does  not  deny  that 
transient  groups  of  several  hundred  individuals 
may  not  congregate  where  food  and  water 
resources  are  available,  for  evidence  indeed 
suggests  this  is  an  almost  universal  human 
impulse.  But  a temporary  aggregation  cannot 
be  considered  as  representing  local  groups  or 
communities  who  demonstrate  their  territoria- 
lity in  some  consistent  fashion.  Where  ecolo- 
gical resources  allow  these  larger  groups  for 
some  portion  of  the  annual  cycle,  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  both  social  and  genealogical 
relations,  as  well  as  forms  of  recruitment,  will 
differ  from  smaller  groups.  Forms  of  descent, 
marital  restrictions,  and  permanence  of  mem- 
bership can  be  expected  to  vary  within  the 
reasonable  limits  of  adaptive  human  behavior. 

The  first  type  of  local  group,  characterized 
by  small  numbers  supported  by  a local  biota 
which  generally  requires  greater  group  mobi- 
lity for  its  use,  does  represent  a rather  tight 
equilibrium  system.  But  the  system’s  forces 
which  maintain  its  central  tendencies  are  not 
easy  to  discern.  It  is  tempting,  regarding  such 
local  groups  in  Australia,  to  consider  that 
territorial  defense,  which  occured  frequently, 
set  the  limit  of  group  size  by  its  demand  for  a 
minimal  number  of  competent  spearmen.  But 
the  same  size  group  prevails  among  the  Kala- 
hari Bushmen,  where  territorial  defense  is 
exceedingly  rare.  It  is  also  found  among  the 


Birdsell  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene  Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among  Hunter-Gatherers 


Birhor  of  India,  where  Williams  (Chapter  14, 
this  volume)  shows  that  rigid  territoriality  does 
not  exist.  Williams’  explanation,  that  local 
groups  of  this  size  and  character  have  size 
limits  determined  primarily  by  such  social 
arrangements  as  are  involved  in  the  pattern  of 
marital  exchanges  of  women,  is  attractive  and 
more  likely  will  prove  the  primary  determinant. 
Stochastic  variations  in  the  periodicity  and  sex 
of  births  can  be  visualized  as  imposing  a mini- 
mum size  for  successful  survival  on  such  local 
groups.  The  upper  limitations  on  size  will  be 
determined  by  a complex  of  factors  involving 
human  mobility,  the  nature  and  concentration 
of  food  resources,  and  the  form  of  the  techno- 
logies by  which  the  biota  is  exploited.  It  is 
revealing  that  using  netting  techniques  for  the 
primary  pursuit  of  game,  the  Birhor  consider 
that  three  to  four  families  comprise  the  efficient 
work  group  in  their  environment,  whereas 
Turnbull  (1961)  indicates  that  four  or  five 
families  are  too  few  to  constitute  a viable 
netting  team  among  the  Bambuti  of  the  Congo 
rain  forests.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
type  of  local  work  group  will  represent  an 
important  determinant  in  group  size,  but  more 
data  are  needed  to  define  its  impact.  That  re- 
constructions of  basic  ecology,  local  residential 
group,  and  work  groups  can  be  achieved,  in 
some  cases  long  after  they  have  disappeared 
functionally,  has  been  demonstrated  by  Wata- 
nabe  (1964a)  in  his  elegant  work  upon  the 
Tokapchi  Ainu. 

The  Nature  of  the  Evidence 

Local  groups  dependent  upon  a generalized 
dietary  have  been  well  censused  for  three 
different  peoples.  In  each  case  the  average  size 
approximates  25  individuals  and  this  seems  to 
represent  a minimum,  modal  value  for  viabi- 
lity for  this  type  of  group  organization.  Among 
the  Birhor,  Williams  shows  that  in  25  bands 
the  average  group  consisted  of  26  individuals. 
Marshall  (i960)  found  that  for  eighteen  bands 
of  !Kung  Bushmen,  the  average  size  was  again 
25  persons  per  group.  Unpublished  data  from 
Tindale  (personal  communication)  indicates 
that  among  ten  precontact  desert  Australian 
local  groups  counted  by  him,  the  average  num- 
ber is  again  25  persons.  In  the  last  case,  the 
range  is  very  tight  and  suggests  that  the  forces 


235 

which  maintain  such  an  equilibrium  of  num- 
bers act  powerfully.  Data  detailed  by  all  three 
authors  validates  the  nature  of  the  equilibrium 
system  by  the  demonstration  that  bands  that 
are  either  unusually  small  or  large  in  their 
numbers  find  an  explanation  within  the  forces 
of  the  system.  Local  groups  of  this  type  must 
be  large  enough  to  function  successfully  in  a 
social  sense,  and  small  enough  to  minimize 
strain  on  food  and  water  resources. 

Local  groups  of  larger  size  have  been  widely 
documented  in  the  ethnological  literature  and 
in  a general  way  their  occurrence  is  based  upon 
concentrations  of  food  rather  than  high  popula- 
tion densities  per  se.  The  nature  of  such  food 
concentration  varies  and  may  be  partly  re- 
gional, as  in  the  cases  where  acorns  and  salmon 
are  major  food  resources,  or  highly  localized 
as  in  the  case  of  sago  swamps,  elephant-bog 
traps,  and  the  ancient  sea  mammal  resources 
as  at  Iputiak.  The  very  availability  of  large 
masses  of  food  in  a concentrated  form,  com- 
bined with  methods  of  food  preservation,  sug- 
gests that  the  local  groups  will  be  maintained 
by  a much  looser  system  of  equilibrium  forces 
and  that  these  will  show  a wide  variety  of 
forms.  Behavioral  preferences  may  override 
energetics.  There  is  no  profit  in  attempting  to 
model  such  situations  until  much  more  detailed 
data  have  been  provided  from  field  research. 

Local  group  territoriality  manifests  itself 
adaptively  in  a wide  range  of  definitions.  These 
are  well  discussed  by  Stanner  (1965)  where  he 
introduces  a terminology  involving  (1)  estate, 
(2)  range,  (3)  domain,  and  (4)  regime.  These 
terms  focus  attention  upon  the  ecologically 
varying  nature  of  territoriality  among  such 
generalized  hunters  as  the  Australians. 

Predictions  for  Pleistocene  Hunters 

1.  Hunters  dependent  upon  a generalized  and 
locally  raised  biota  should  fall  into  the  equili- 
brium system  found  among  desert  Australians, 
Kalahari  Bushmen,  and  Birhor.  Their  modal 
numbers  should  approximate  25  persons,  mar- 
riage should  be  exogamous,  and  the  probabili- 
ties are  high  that  the  group  was  patrilineal  and 
patrilocal. 

2.  Where  large  food  resources  are  concen- 
trated either  regionally  or  seasonally,  local 
groups  take  on  a very  different  nature.  They 


236  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

will  be  larger  in  size,  different  manifestations 
of  territoriality  can  be  expected,  and  their 
principles  of  descent,  marriage,  and  recruit- 
ment can  be  expected  to  show  wide  variety. 
Data  among  living  hunters  in  such  situations 
show  such  a wide  range  of  adaptive  behavior 
that  Pleistocene  reconstructions  will  largely 
depend  upon  archeological  evidences.  While 
ecology  will  determine  the  limiting  factors  in 
such  cases,  it  will  also  permit  a wide  variety  of 
social  solutions. 

Required  Research  for  the  Future 

The  most  urgent  need  is  to  detail  or  recon- 
struct the  functioning  of  local  groups.  How 
many  people,  of  what  ages  and  sexes,  in  what 
specified  biological  and  social  relationships, 
reside  or  camp  together  for  what  defined 
periods,  and  for  what  reasons?  Travel  distances 
between  camps  in  terms  of  seasonal  rhythms, 
and  defined  in  terms  of  exploitation  both  of 
varying  food  resources  and  water  supplies,  are 
further  imperatives.  Much  of  the  current  con- 
fusion in  the  literature  stems  from  a failure  to 
define  the  ecological  base  which  makes  possible 
larger  groupings.  Australian  ceremonial  gather- 
ings held  at  intervals  of  several  years  in  locally 
favored  spots  are  not  comparable  to  the  more 
or  less  permanent  residential  groups  of  similar 
size  elsewhere  which  depend  upon  concentra- 
tions of  food  and  some  form  of  food  preserva- 
tion. Although  these  extremes  can  be  con- 
ceived of  as  existing  along  a kind  of  complex 
continuum,  they  are  near  its  poles  and  the 
ecologically  necessary  conditions  require  speci- 
fication. 


Equilibrium  in  Family  Size 
The  System 

In  a population  stabilized  at  the  operationally 
defined  carrying  capacity  of  its  given  environ- 
ment, some  limitation  on  procreative  activities 
naturally  filter  down  to  the  level  of  the  biolo- 
gical family.  These  may  be  examined  most 
profitably  in  terms  of  the  requirements  which 
affect  the  spacing  of  the  natal  survivors. 
Generalized  hunters  with  their  requirements 
of  high  mobility,  present  the  most  exacting 


model.  Australian  data  (Birdsell,  MS-3)  indi- 
cate that  the  inability  of  a mother  to  carry 
more  than  one  child  at  a time,  together  with 
her  female  baggage,  impose  the  first  insur- 
mountable barrier  to  a large  number  of  chil- 
dren. This  factor,  strongly  reinforced  by  an 
equally  limiting  incapacity  to  nurse  more  than 
one  child  simultaneously,  imposes  a minimum 
of  a three-year  spacing  upon  children  designed 
for  survival.  Since  human  female  reproductive 
physiology  does  not  reliably  prevent  concep- 
tion while  still  nursing,  children  who  cannot 
be  reared  are  frequently  conceived  and  born. 
The  solution  is  systematic  infanticide.  There  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  it  would  have  been 
present  throughout  human  groups  in  the 
Pleistocene  period.  It  seems  to  represent  a 
dislocation  in  human  reproductive  physiology 
following  entrance  into  the  bipedal  niche  and 
rapid  brain  expansion. 

The  Evidence 

Among  194  matings  based  upon  precontact 
genealogies  for  desert  Australians  (126  col- 
lected by  Birdsell,  68  by  Tindale),  data  show 
a sex  ratio  at  adulthood  of  approximately  150 
per  cent  (150  males  for  100  females).  Other 
data  show  that  the  sex  ratio  at  birth  among 
Australian  aborigines  is  100  per  cent.  The  dis- 
crepancy in  the  sex  ratios  among  adults  indi- 
cates that  at  least  15  per  cent  of  the  children 
born  to  aboriginal  women  are  eliminated  by 
infanticide.  Ethnological  evidence  for  Aus- 
tralia documents  that  infanticide  was  pre- 
ferentially practiced  upon  female  babies.  This 
was  true  for  desert  groups,  and  also  for  those 
living  in  better  endowed  areas.  The  value  of 
15  per  cent  demonstrated  by  these  data  is  a 
minimal  one,  and  the  observations  of  observant, 
early,  postcontact  Europeans  places  the  figure 
as  high  as  50  per  cent.  Unfortunately,  medical 
science  has  not  yielded  accurate  information 
on  the  relationships  between  nursing  and 
ovulation  needed  to  fix  the  figure  more  ac- 
curately. Overall  considerations  incline  a judg- 
ment toward  the  higher  values. 

That  the  Australian  evidence  is  not  isolated 
is  provided  by  data  from  other  groups.  Birket- 
Smith  (1929)  documented  sex  ratios  equally 
warped  among  the  Caribou  Eskimo,  and  his 
values  were  strikingly  consistent  among  the 


Birdsell  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene  Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among  Hunter-Gatherers 


five  groups  he  censused.  But  Marshall  (1962) 
found  no  sex  preference  in  the  systematic  infan- 
ticide practiced  by  the  !Kung  Bushmen.  There 
is  reason  to  believe  that  the  limiting  forces  in- 
volved in  the  necessary  spacing  of  children  to 
be  saved  would  apply  broadly  to  all  hunting 
groups,  although  sex  preferences  might  vary. 

The  factors  which  produce  compulsory  spac- 
ing of  the  viable  children  among  hunters  limits 
the  total  number  that  can  be  saved  and  hence 
affects  the  variance  statistically.  Among  the 
194  sibships  contained  in  the  precontact  desert 
genealogies  referred  to  above,  the  range  of 
children  surviving  to  adulthood  extends  from 
o to  7 offspring.  And  185  of  the  sibships  in- 
cluded between  1 and  5 children  each.  In  a 
hunting  population  in  which  total  numbers  are 
remaining  essentially  constant,  the  standard 
deviations  for  the  surviving  offsprings  approxi- 
mates 1 .4  and  this  when  squared  gives  a 
variance  of  about  2.0.  These  values  not  only 
represent  equilibrium  figures,  but  exist  in  so 
tightly  structured  a system  that  they  may  be 
considered  a constant  for  people  living  under 
these  conditions.  Such  values  should  charac- 
terize human  populations  far  back  into  the 
Pleistocene  period. 

Predictions  for  Pleistocene  Populations 

Systematic  infanticide  may  be  assumed  to  have 
characterized  human  populations  throughout 
the  Pleistocene.  Its  probability  of  being  pre- 
ferential female  infanticide  is  strengthened  by 
data  from  recent  hunters.  The  variance  in  sur- 
viving adult  sibs  would  approximate  the  con- 
stant value  of  2.0,  with  a standard  deviation 
of  1.4  and  a range  from  o to  7. 

Research  Needed 

Demographic  and  genealogical  data  extending 
into  precontact  situations  are  urgently  needed. 
Disturbed  sex  ratios  at  birth  or  among  adults 
provide  indirect  evidence  of  systematic  infan- 
ticide. But  their  absence  does  not  deny  the 
practice.  Medical  research  is  urgently  needed 
to  define  the  relationship  between  the  resump- 
tion of  ovulation  in  terms  of  the  prolongation 
of  nursing  for  periods  up  to  three  years  after 
birth. 


237 

Equilibrium  in  the  Size  of 

the  Effective  Breeding  Population 

The  System 

In  terms  of  evolutionary  processes,  one  of  the 
most  important  population  factors  involves  the 
effective  size  of  the  breeding  population.  Its 
value  is  determined  from  the  following  equa- 
tion given  by  Wright  (1938) : 

ak2  + 2 

The  equation  states  in  essence  that  for  evolu- 
tionary processes  the  effective  size  of  the  breed- 
ing population  is  a direct  function  of  the  num- 
ber of  persons  who  contribute  their  genes 
effectively  to  the  next  generation  and  an  in- 
verse function  of  the  variance  of  the  offspring 
so  produced.  Offspring  to  be  counted  must  in 
their  own  time  reach  the  midpoint  of  their 
reproductive  span.  Thus,  both  for  parents  and 
children  very  special  types  of  data  are  required 
and  these  are  difficult  to  obtain  in  practice. 

The  actual  number  of  parents  who  repro- 
duce effectively  will  be  some  proportion  of  the 
total  of  adults  in  the  breeding  isolate.  Since  in 
Australia,  and  among  other  hunters  generally, 
the  genetic  isolate  is  the  equivalent  of  the  dia- 
lectical tribe,  it  becomes  clear  that  the  number 
of  effective  breeders  will  be  related  to  tribal 
size.  As  shown  above,  the  size  of  a dialectical 
tribe  is  in  itself  an  equilibrium  system  and  it 
follows  that  this  will  hold  true  for  the  number 
of  effective  breeders  as  well. 

The  rate  of  intertribal  marriages  acts  in  such 
a fashion  as  to  further  reinforce  the  equilibrium 
system  represented  by  the  number  of  effective 
breeders.  Tindale  (1953)  showed  that  over 
wide  stretches  of  aboriginal  Australia  the  rate 
of  intertribal  marriage  averaged  14  per  cent 
per  generation.  But  this  rate  may  be  expected 
to  vary  with  the  size  of  the  dialectical  tribe 
involved.  In  tribes  which  number  much  fewer 
than  the  500  persons  which  comprised  the 
modal  tribe,  more  women  will  be  brought  in 
from  outside  tribes  than  is  customary.  This 
will  tend  to  extend  the  size  of  the  breeding 
population  and  so  restore  its  numbers  toward 
the  higher  modal  value.  In  contrary  circum- 
stances, where  the  dialectical  tribe  considerably 
exceeds  500  persons,  there  will  be  less  need  to  go 
outside  of  tribal  boundaries  to  obtain  the  wives 


238  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

so  that  the  rate  of  intertribal  marriage  should 
be  less  than  average.  In  very  large  tribes  it  is 
to  be  expected  that  distance  will  also  operate 
as  an  isolating  factor  within  the  bands  of  the 
tribe.  These  tendencies  will  somewhat  reduce 
the  number  of  effective  breeders  and  again  act 
as  a restoring  force  toward  the  equilibrium 
values. 

The  Evidence 

In  spite  of  having  worked  intensively  with 
Australian  aboriginal  material  for  a quarter 
of  a century,  the  author  has  not  yet  calculated 
the  effective  size  of  the  breeding  population. 
This  is  not  due  to  any  difficulty  in  calculating 
the  variance  of  the  effective  offspring  in 
Wright’s  equation,  but  lies  in  the  difficulty  of 
estimating  the  number  of  effective  breeders  in 
the  population.  As  indicated  earlier  they  can 
only  be  included  when  in  turn  their  children 
reach  the  midpoint  of  the  reproductive  span. 
For  man,  the  problem  is  complicated  by  the 
fact  that  generations  overlap  in  real  popula- 
tions.Genealogical  evidence,  as  useful  as  it  is  for 
many  purposes,  contains  the  built-in  artifacts 
that  originate  from  its  origins  in  the  memories 
of  men.  The  errors  contained  in  genealogies 
will  often  be  systematic  and  hence  effect  the 
calculation  of  the  size  of  the  breeding  popula- 
tion. 

As  a figure  of  magnitude,  the  size  of  the 
effective  breeding  population  for  aboriginal 
Australia  should  approximate  1 75  persons 
where  the  size  of  the  dialectical  tribe  is  500. 
As  explained  above,  this  figure  will  rise  a little 
less  rapidly  than  the  number  of  individuals  in 
the  dialectical  tribe  increase;  it  will  diminish 
a little  more  slowly  than  will  a comparable 
decrease  in  numbers  of  tribal  members.  But 
further  data  are  needed  for  an  accurate  esti- 
mation of  the  real  value.  The  size  of  the  effec- 
tive breeding  population  is  affected  by  poly- 
gamous marriages,  and  these  data  for  Australia 
are  available.  But  biological  realities  require 
the  estimation  of  biological  paternity  insofar 
as  it  differs  from  social  paternity.  This  will 
require  the  analysis  of  blood  group  data  to 
calculate  a reasonable  rate  of  illegitimacy  and 
so  to  correct  for  the  number  of  males  effectively 
contributing  gametes  to  the  next  generation. 


One  of  the  methods  available  for  refining 
the  estimate  of  the  number  of  effective  breeders 
depends  upon  the  availability  of  detailed  popu- 
lation pyramids.  These  have  never  been  pub- 
lished for  precontact  Australians,  but  data  in 
two  areas  will  become  available  in  the  near 
future.  These  will  help  control  the  complica- 
tion introduced  by  the  fact  that  in  a society 
where  males  outnumber  females  in  the  ratio 
of  150:100  it  is  still  possible  to  practice  poly- 
gamous marriage.  The  solution,  of  course,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  delayed  age  at  which  males 
obtain  their  wives.  The  quantitative  data 
provided  by  Meggitt  (1962)  and  several  others 
will  help  estimate  the  effect  of  a sequence  of 
husbands  upon  the  effective  reproduction  of  a 
given  female. 

There  is  another  further  loose  end  to  be  tied 
in  before  proper  estimates  can  be  made  of  the 
number  of  effective  breeders  in  a genetic 
isolate.  Given  the  stringent  requirement  that 
parents  can  only  be  counted  as  effective  when 
their  own  offspring  in  their  proper  turn  pro- 
duce effectively,  genealogical  data  do  not  pro- 
vide adequate  time  depth.  This  can  be  found 
in  a model  of  the  proper  construction.  The 
author  (MS-3)  has  explored  the  long-range 
effects  of  this  phenomenon  in  a patrilineal 
society.  Using  the  range  of  effective  sibship  size 
determined  by  the  precontact  genealogies  re- 
ferred to  earlier  in  a model  in  which  stochastic 
reproductive  processes  are  assigned  by  random 
numbers,  an  unexpected  result  was  obtained. 
Patrilineages  die  out  at  the  rate  of  approxi- 
mately 30  per  cent  per  generation.  This  is  of 
course  one  of  the  great  sources  of  errors  in 
genealogical  materials.  It  has  not  yet  been 
possible  to  determine  what  the  exact  impact 
of  this  high  rate  of  patrilineage  extinction 
would  be  upon  the  number  of  effective 
breeders.  It  is  likely  to  reduce  the  size  of  the 
effective  breeding  population  well  below  the 
value  of  1 75  persons  as  estimated  in  an  earlier 
and  incomplete  analysis. 

A final  problem  involved  in  calculating  the 
size  of  the  effective  breeding  population  turns 
upon  the  occurrence  of  periodic  reductions  in 
isolate  numbers  due  to  catastrophes  in  nature. 
Neither  the  spacing  nor  the  effect  is  deter- 
minate, but  the  result  would  be  to  further 
reduce  N. 


Birdsell  Predictions  for  the  Pleistocene  Based  on  Equilibrium  Systems  among  Hunter -Gatherers 


Predictions  for  Pleistocene  Populations 

With  the  exception  of  those  special  instances 
in  which  concentrated  food  resources  allow  for 
larger  human  societies,  it  can  be  predicted  that 
throughout  that  portion  of  the  Pleistocene  in 
which  man  lived  as  a successful  hunter  the  size 
of  the  effective  breeding  populations  will  be 
small  in  numbers.  The  equilibrium  system  will 
be  somewhat  tighter  than  that  which  structures 
the  dialect  tribes  through  its  communication 
system.  The  evolutionary  processes  which  are 
to  be  associated  with  small  breeding  popula- 
tions should  have  been  operative  during  the 
entirety  of  this  period.  While  random  genetic 
drift  has  been  indicated  by  the  mathematical 
models  to  be  anticipated  under  such  conditions, 
empirical  data  from  Australia  aboriginal  iso- 
lates suggest  that  the  processes  of  evolution  are 
in  fact  more  complicated  than  have  been 
predicted. 

Research  Needed 

Granted  that  the  effective  size  of  the  breeding 
population  does  constitute  its  own  equilibrium 
system,  there  is  a great  need  for  detailed  data 
at  a precontact  level  for  the  factors  which  in- 
fluence its  magnitude.  This  includes  not  only 
the  overt  aspects  of  marriage  sequencing  but 
the  covert  aspects  that  may  influence  pro- 
creation outside  of  marriage.  The  definition  of 
effective  parenthood  in  terms  of  evolutionarily 
effective  offspring  imposes  difficulties  which  do 
not  promise  a direct  solution.  Even  so,  empiri- 
cal values  from  real  populations  and  detailed 
genealogies  are  needed  to  assist  in  the  modeling 
of  effective  estimates  bracketing  the  real  values. 

Conclusions 

Systematic  infanticide  has  been  a necessary 
procedure  for  spacing  human  children,  pre- 
sumably beginning  after  man’s  entry  into  the 
niche  of  bipedalism,  and  lasting  until  the 
development  of  advanced  agriculture.  It  in- 
volved between  1 5 and  50  per  cent  of  the  total 
number  of  births.  Among  recent  hunters  it 
tends  to  be  preferentially  female  in  character 
and  probably  was  in  the  Pleistocene.  The 
variance  among  effective  surviving  sibs  ap- 
proaches 2.0  as  a constant. 


239 

The  necessary  mechanisms  for  spacing 
human  societies  are  primarily  invested  in  local 
groups.  Among  generalized  hunters,  dependent 
upon  local  biota  for  their  food  sources,  the  local 
group  averages  about  25  persons  as  a basement 
figure.  Smaller  populations  would  be  handi- 
capped socially  in  a variety  of  ways,  but 
primarily  in  those  affecting  martial  exchanges 
of  girls.  Larger  local  groups  would  be  at  a 
disadvantage  in  terms  of  food  and  water  re- 
sources except  in  unusually  rich  environments. 
Local  groups  of  this  character  may  be  pro- 
jected backward  in  human  evolution  to  that 
point  which  the  observer  estimates  as  involving 
local  group  exogamy  as  a source  of  social 
regulation. 

For  generalized  hunters  and  gatherers,  the 
density  of  communications  normally  defined 
by  foot  mobility  and  fully  developed  symbolic 
speech  results  in  a language  community  known 
as  the  dialect  tribe.  Its  numbers  tend  to  stabi- 
lize around  a population  involving  500  indivi- 
duals, quite  independently  of  population  den- 
sity, the  richness  of  the  biota,  and  the  techno- 
logical development  of  extractive  efficiency. 
Since  the  evidence  for  competent  bipedal 
mobility,  as  defined  by  the  structure  of  the 
foot,  goes  back  into  the  beginning  of  the 
Pleistocene,  the  development  of  dialect  tribal 
groups  can  be  best  associated  with  the  evolu- 
tion of  the  capacity  for  a rich  oral  communica- 
tion. This  would  presumably  push  these  linguis- 
tic units  back  into  the  middle  of  the  Pleistocene 
period. 

The  size  of  the  effective  breeding  population, 
a parameter  of  considerable  evolutionary  signi- 
ficance, has  its  own  equilibrium  system,  a 
modification  of  that  based  upon  the  density 
communication  system.  For  dialectical  tribes 
with  the  modal  value  of  500,  it  would  be  less  than 
175  in  numbers.  While  its  exact  determination 
is  not  possible,  Pleistocene  populations  were 
effectively  small. 

There  are  numerous  situations  in  which  con- 
centrated food  resources,  such  as  migrating  big 
game,  spawning  salmon,  or  sago  swamps  pro- 
vide a different  basis  for  existence.  When 
accompanied  by  either  artificial  or  natural 
means  of  a preservation,  these  concentrated 
sources  of  energy  characteristically  result  in  the 
development  of  much  larger  groups  involving 


240  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

various  kinds  of  recruitment,  descent,  marital 
relations,  and  seasonal  residence.  Such  local 
population  will  reflect  the  adaptive  nature  of 
human  behavior  in  their  variety.  With  man’s 
gregarious  tendencies  limited  largely  by  food 
resources,  this  type  of  local  group  should  be 
projected  well  back  into  the  Pleistocene  in 
localities  which  are  suitable  for  its  develop- 
ment. It  will  appear  in  the  archeological  re- 
cord with  a biased  frequency  since  generalized 
hunters  leave  but  scanty  remains  for  recovery. 
Since  it  can  be  shown  that  the  size  of  the  dialect 
tribal  group  varies  sensitively  with  those  fac- 
tors which  alter  the  pattern  of  the  density  of 
communication,  it  should  be  expected  that 
large  local  groups  based  upon  concentrated 
food  supplies  would  also  increase  its  size. 


Since  the  intrinsic  rate  of  increase  in  man 
allows  it,  human  populations  should  be  con- 
sidered to  reach  the  culturally  effective  carry- 
ing capacity  of  a given  environment  within 
very  short  time  periods.  For  most  Pleistocene 
situations,  the  population  density  should  be 
considered  to  approximate  that  of  operational 
saturation.  Regional  densities  will  be  deter- 
mined by  variations  in  biota,  climate,  and  the 
extractive  efficiency  of  the  men  who  exploit 
the  environment.  These  can  be  determined  for 
given  zoogeographical  regions  only  from  de- 
tailed analyses  using  living  hunters  and 
gatherers  as  analogue  types  of  models.  In  all 
cases  population  attributes  must  be  effectively 
reconstructed  to  approximate  precontact  con- 
ditions. 


Discussions,  Part  V 


25a.  The  Demography  of 
Hunters:  an  Eskimo  Example 

Speaker:  Laughlin 

Laughlin:  I should  like  to  use  population 
reconstruction,  primarily  of  the  Aleut  and. 
Eskimo  stock,  as  a means  of  demonstrating 
one  kind  of  systematic  approach  to  the  analysis 
of  a population  and  its  history.  To  begin  with, 
we  ought  to  appreciate  that  the  concept  of  the 
Eskimo  is  enormously  distorted,  since  their 
distribution  is  quite  at  variance  with  geo- 
graphical areas  to  which  we  have  formerly 
paid  most  attention.  The  distribution  of  the 
population  makes  sense  in  terms  of  the  history, 
for  which  there  is  a considerable  antiquity — 
some  8,500  years  documented  in  the  west — 
and  in  terms  of  resources  available  in  an  ac- 
cessible form.  The  polar  Eskimos,  who  are  most 
talked  about,  constituted  250-300  at  the  time 
of  their  discovery.  The  literature  published 
about  them  must  surely  exceed  in  actual 
poundage  the  total  body  weight  of  all  the 
polar  Eskimos  living  since  the  year  1000.  Much 
the  same  thing  applies  for  the  some  7,000  cen- 
tral Eskimos,  who  are  exceeded  in  number  by 
the  single  population  of  Konyang  Eskimos 
living  on  Kodiak  Island.  The  population  dis- 
tribution very  clearly  centers  in  the  southwest, 
where  the  greatest  amount  of  cultural  diversity 
occurs  in  language,  material  culture,  art  styles, 


etc.  Another  major  population  center  is  around 
the  Bering  Strait,  and  a third  is  found  on  the 
west  (particularly  the  southwest)  coast  of 
Greenland. 

The  first  ordinate  that  we  can  see  is  the 
contrast  between  the  zones  in  which  winter 
ice  deprives  people  of  access  to  the  intertidal 
area,  and  the  open  water  zones  where  there  is 
easy  access  to  the  intertidal  area.  If  we  eschew 
talking  about  a community  as  such  and  in- 
stead break  it  into  components — such  as  the 
kinds  of  people  and  varieties  of  habitat  pre- 
sent— we  find  that  we  can  easily  chart  kinds 
of  people  and  the  particular  habitats  that  they 
can  exploit.  This,  in  turn,  makes  it  clear  that 
there  are  more  habitats  available  to  people  in 
certain  areas  than  in  others,  which  suggests  one 
reason  why  there  are  more  people  living  in  the 
former  areas. 

If  we  take  an  Aleutian  or  Kodiak  Island 
example,  we  can  categorize  the  population  in 
terms,  roughly,  of  mobility  in  the  following 
(ascending)  order: 

1 . Old,  infirm  females,  who  cannot  do  much 
beyond  collecting  shellfish; 

2.  Old,  infirm  males,  who  can  do  the  same 
things,  and  can  also  go  fishing  in  boats; 

3.  Pregnant  women,  who  can  do  a variety 
of  things,  subject  to  local  taboos  (not  touch- 
ing salmon  or  whales,  not  going  near  streams, 
etc.)  and  the  advancement  of  pregnancy; 

4.  Children,  who  actually  produce  a great 

241 


242  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

percentage  of  their  own  food  supply  in  the 
subarctic  zone — including,  especially,  shellfish; 

5.  Young  and  middle-aged  females;  and 

6.  Young  and  middle-aged  males.  On  both 
of  these  last  groups  we  have  a good  deal  of 
data,  which  in  some  cases  tends  to  bias  our 
views  about  subsistence. 

We  can  see  immediately  that  as  one  moves 
north  of  the  winter  ice  line,  the  proportion  of 
the  population  actively  engaged  in  procuring 
food  must  decline.  Since  the  aged  and  infirm 
simply  cannot  drive  a sled  over  the  ice,  punch 
a hole  through  two  feet  of  ice,  harpoon  a seal, 
and  bring  it  home,  members  of  this  group  are 
all  potential  candidates  for  abandonment  and 
exposure.  Overall,  we  can  count  some  four  or 
more  different  habitats  available  to  limited 
segments  of  the  population,  which  keeps  mem- 
bers of  these  groups  from  being  a burden  to 
the  rest.  So  population  density  reflects  not  just 
the  natural  resources,  but  the  natural  resources 
keyed  to  certain  kinds  of  individuals  (and  to 
differential  technological  development). 

Another  factor  in  the  matter  of  ecological 
resources  is,  of  course,  the  annual  distribution 
of  the  resources.  When  bears,  walrus,  and  other 
exotic  forms  are  not  available,  th«  populations 
of  the  southwest  can  get  by  on  fish,  shellfish, 
octopi,  and  other  denizens  of  the  intertidal 
zone.  They  eat  less  well,  but  they  survive.  In 
contrast,  people  in  the  central  Arctic  may 
undergo  final  starvation,  as  witness  the  Sadler- 
miut  Eskimo  skeletons  in  our  collections. 

I would  like  to  say  something  about  popula- 
tion “bottlenecks,”  since  these  are  prominent 
all  over  the  world.  The  people  anticipate  these, 
and  there  is  a considerable  feedback  process. 
They  know  that  they  have  to  adjust  to  the 
leanest  months  of  the  year  and  to  areas  of 
lesser  resources  or  greater  rigor.  In  such 
situations  there  is  an  increase  in  intentional 
and  explicit  population  controls  such  as  pro- 
longed nursing,  abortion,  infanticide,  absten- 
tion, and  increased  adoptions.  Infanticide,  in 
particular,  involves  decisions  based  on  careful 
consideration  of  a number  of  factors.  The 
choice  of  the  child  to  be  left  out  to  die  depends 
upon  the  sex  and  health  of  the  child  and  his 
siblings,  the  time  of  year,  and  the  parents’ 
estimate  of  the  likelihood  of  having  a child  of 
the  desired  sex.  The  anticipation  of  population 
bottlenecks  is  as  prominent  in  the  thinking  of 


the  Aleuts  as  it  is  among  peoples  further  north. 
It  influences  their  movements  and,  as  des- 
cribed, calls  forth  intentional  population  con- 
trols. 

Turning  now  to  the  topic  of  longevity,  one 
of  the  variables  about  which  we  have  reliable 
information  is  the  large  contrast  in  longevity 
between  isolates  around  the  world,  and  we 
can  demonstrate  them  most  neatly  in  the  Aleut 
and  Eskimo  area.  One  of  the  two  best  samples 
that  we  have  is  the  collection  of  187  skeletons 
— collected  by  Dr.  Charles  Merbs  and  me — of 
the  now-extinct  Sadlermiut  Eskimo.  In  this 
particular  population  (treating  the  collection 
like  one  population  although  this  is  not  actually 
the  case),  we  find  that  no  one  lived  to  an  age 
greater  than  55.  Something  on  the  order  of  40 
per  cent  died  before  age  4.  Undoubtedly,  as 
with  all  archeological  series,  certain  ages  are 
underrepresented,  and  the  youngest  are  most 
underrepresented.  But  Eskimos  are  required 
to  confess  stillbirths  and  miscarriages,  and  they 
tend  to  bury  the  infant  dead,  so  the  series  is 
still  pretty  good. 

In  marked  contrast  to  this  is  a series  for  the 
Fox  of  the  eastern  Aleutian  islands,  a series 
compiled  by  Bishop  Veniaminov,  who  spent 
ten  years  there.  Fortunately,  he  recorded  age 
at  death,  and  here  we  find  a number  of  people 
between  ages  90-100  and  quite  a few  over  age 
55.  Infant  mortality  was  on  the  order  of  20  per 
cent,  roughly  half  that  in  the  central  Arctic. 
This  situation  can  be  generalized  for  the  area 
as  a whole.  Longevity  is  obviously  and  con- 
siderably greater  in  an  area  of  good,  accessible 
resources  and  high  technological  development. 

With  an  increase  in  longevity,  other  changes 
take  place  in  the  composition  of  the  population, 
some  with  genetic  and  some  with  cultural  im- 
plications. I will  point  out  that  the  develop- 
ment of  intellectual  knowledge  depends  upon 
the  retention  of  older  people  who  are,  in  a 
sense,  libraries.  There  is  actually  some  feed- 
back in  the  documented  fact  that  the  older 
people  were  the  sophisticated  doctors  who 
intervened  in  the  delivery  of  offspring  and  did 
a substantial  amount  to  reduce  infant  morta- 
lity. So  it  is  not  just  a question  of  more  people 
with  more  food. 

Pathology  has  told  us  very  little  about  the 
causes  of  death.  We  can  learn  a certain  amount 
about  other  things  from  gross  abnormalities  in 


the  skeletons.  Many  of  the  Arctic  peoples 
periodically  suffered  from  malnutrition,  as 
shown  by  cases  of  enamel  hypoplasia  on  the 
teeth  of  the  Aleuts  and  the  Arctic  Eskimos.  We 
also  know  that  in  this  area  the  people  had  a 
high  frequency  of  spinal  disorders — separate 
neural  arches,  and  spondylitis.  Yet  these  and 
some  other  gross  pathologies  apparently  did 
not  affect  their  behavior  as  much  as  one  would 
expect.  The  frequency  of  fractures  over  the 
entire  area  is  rather  low,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  we  know  that  they  often  fall  and  oc- 
casionally have  encounters  with  animals  hav- 
ing ulterior  motives. 

The  pathological  or  disease  load  that  these 
people  carry  is  difficult  to  understand  today, 
because  they  have  been  put  through  several 
selection  filters.  After  the  first  smallpox  epi- 
demic went  through  the  area,  the  population 
was  genetically  restructured.  Apropos  of  this, 
one  thing  that  we  ought  to  keep  in  mind  is  the 
fact  that  a population  can  maintain  its  distinc- 
tive marker  genes — those  that  deal  with  the 
external  characteristics  by  which  we  identify 
them — and  yet  undergo  an  enormous  and 
significant  restructuring  as  regards  certain 
other  genes. 

25b.  Population  Control  Factors: 
Infanticide,  Disease, 

Nutrition,  and  Food  Supply 

Speakers:  Alland,  Birdsell,  Deevey,  Isaac,  Turn- 
bull,  Washburn,  Williams,  Woodburn 

Birdsell:  I would  like  to  talk  briefly  about 
family  size  and  birth  spacing — subjects  on 
which  we  have  some  very  good  data.  If  you 
arrange  precontact  genealogies  and  adult  sib- 
ships  of  Australian  aborigines  according  to 
completed  family  size,  the  sex-ratios  form  a 
very  interesting  systematic  curve  varying  from 
about  130  males  per  100  females  for  the  modal 
families  to  about  260  males  per  100  females  for 
families  in  which  five  children  have  survived. 
Statistically,  this  shows  an  enormous  amount 
of  family  planning  that  is  not  indicated  in  the 
ethnology. 

Doctors  who  have  done  the  best  work  at 
present  on  the  relationship  of  ovulation  and 
conception  to  lactation  have  still  never  done 


Discussions,  Part  V 243 

it  under  optimal  circumstances.  For  example, 
one  team  did  endometrial  biopsies  on  roughly 
200  women  for  a year;  they  were  able  to  get 
good  data  on  ovulation,  but  since  the  duration 
of  lactation  over  this  period  was  not  known, 
it  is  of  little  use  for  our  purposes.  However,  it 
is  clear  that  in  humans  lactation  only  incom- 
pletely and/or  sporadically  suppresses  ovula- 
tion. That  is,  I take  it,  a post-bipedal  pheno- 
menon, and  I see  no  reason  not  to  suppose 
that  it  characterizes  all  human  groups.  On  the 
basis  of  this,  I project  the  hypothesis  that  diffi- 
culties of  nursing  and  mobility  in  the  Pleisto- 
cene may  have  made  necessary  the  killing  of 
1 5~5°  Per  cent  °f  children  born,  since  lactation 
alone  would  not  have  provided  sufficient  spac- 
ing of  births  to  maintain  equilibrium. 

Woodburn:  In  talking  about  birth  control 
and  infanticide,  it  is  important  to  remember 
that  these  decisions  appear  to  be  made  right 
within  the  family,  often  by  the  mother  alone. 
This  has  important  implications;  chief  among 
these  is  the  simple  fact  that  the  making  of  the 
choice  is  relative  to  the  circumstances  of  a 
particular  mother  and  not  necessarily  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  whole  population. 

Deevey  : As  you  know,  it  is  a moot  question 
both  in  ecology  and  in  evolutionary  biology  as 
to  how  it  is  possible  for  the  system  to  exert 
pressure  independently  of  or  in  conflict  with 
an  individual  component  of  the  system.  An 
aspect  of  the  same  problem  is  the  question 
whether  there  can  be  group  selection  in  con- 
trast to  individual  selection. 

Woodburn:  I think  that  the  Netsilik  are 
particularly  interesting  in  this  respect.  It  looks 
as  though  the  female  infanticide  rate  works  to 
the  disadvantage  of  the  population  in  general. 
I would  be  interested  to  know  about  the  effects 
of  infanticide  on  other  populations,  taken  as 
wholes. 

Birdsell:  The  Caribou  Eskimo  make  a good 
case  in  this  regard.  I think  that  they  do  show 
the  individual  and  the  system  working  to- 
gether. Birket-Smith  (1929)  had  five  groups — 
subtribes,  as  we  might  call  them.  He  only  di- 
chotomized the  population  into  children  and 
adults.  All  five  showed  an  average  sex  ratio  of 
145  for  children.  In  the  adults,  the  average 
ratio  had  fallen  to  80.  Those  data  suggest  that 
infanticide  was  done  as  a primary  family 
spacing,  and  was  so  programmed  in  terms  of 


244  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

population  effects  that  there  were  just  about 
enough  hunters  that  could  hunt  for  two  families 
as  one  would  expect  in  a population  of  this 
sort.  In  other  words,  I take  it  that  the  number 
of  competent  hunters  in  a future  context  was 
predicted. 

Williams:  Birdsell  once  suggested  in  an 
article  that  populations  of  man  have  fertility 
such  that  they  can  fill  up  an  ecological  niche 
in  fairly  short  order.  Is  there  any  evidence  that 
the  populations  of  the  Hadza  and  Mbuti  are 
growing  now  ? And  if  not,  why  not  ? 

Woodburn  : There  is  no  evidence  that  the 
Hadza  population  was  ever  any  greater  or 
smaller  than  at  present.  I think  the  population 
could  be  a good  deal  larger  than  it  is  without 
causing  hardship  for  the  Hadza  or  damage  to 
the  environment.  I really  cannot  understand 
the  widespread  emphasis  on  the  ties  between 
population  and  physical  environment  to  the 
exclusion,  say,  of  medical  factors.  One  should 
not  overlook  the  fact  that  when  good  health 
services  are  brought  to  an  area,  there  are 
likely  to  be  sudden  and  great  population  in- 
creases in  that  area,  especially  if  malaria  or 
any  equally  important  disease  is  eradicated. 

Deevey  : Regarding  population  size  and 
limits  on  it,  I would  like  to  ask  Dr.  Woodburn 
about  mineral  nutrition,  especially  salt. 

Woodburn  : When  I was  in  the  field  in  i960 
I was  visited  by  pediatricians,  from  Makerere 
College  Medical  School,  who  examined  the 
children  and  described  them  as  one  of  the  best- 
nourished  groups  they  had  seen  in  East  Africa. 
In  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  Hadza  do  not 
take  any  salt  as  such.  A salt  lake  is  nearby,  but 
no  one  bothers  to  gather  salt  except  those 
living  right  at  the  lake.  They  occasionally 
obtain  a little  through  trade,  but  they  do  not 
consider  it  as  worth  much  effort  or  expense.  I 
assume,  therefore,  that  they  must  get  sufficient 
quantities  of  minerals  from  their  animal  and 
vegetable  foods. 

Alland:  Dubos,  in  his  recent  book  Man 
Adapting  (1965),  has  suggested  that  disease 
does  not  play  an  important  factor  in  population 
control.  I am  not  sure  that  I wholly  agree  with 
him,  but  I do  think  that  disease  (excepting, 
perhaps,  malaria  and  trypanosomiasis)  is  not 
a factor  in  population  control  among  hunters 
and  gatherers,  and  for  the  following  reasons : 
(1)  Isolated  populations  are  less  likely  to  pick 


up  epidemic  diseases — an  epidemic  likes  large 
number  of  people.  (2)  The  parasites  them- 
selves tend  to  accommodate  to  populations  in 
which  they  have  existed  for  a long  period  of 
time,  so  that  there  is  a genetic  sieve  operating 
both  to  make  humans  more  resistant  to  para- 
sites and  to  make  the  parasites  less  noxious  to 
humans.  In  hunting  and  gathering  groups,  the 
most  common  infection  is  helminthic,  and 
helminths  accommodate  particularly  well  to 
their  hosts.  Furthermore,  there  is  good  evi- 
dence that  many  of  the  helminths  may  have 
been  in  human  hosts  for  a considerable  amount 
of  time  and  may,  in  fact,  have  switched  from 
nonhuman  primates  to  humans  a long  time 
ago  during  the  evolution  of  hominids.  (3)  One 
of  the  factors  that  affects  the  severity  of  disease, 
particularly  in  agricultural  peoples,  is  the 
nutritional  factor — especially  a high-starch, 
low-protein  diet,  where  the  immunochemical 
system  is  unbalanced.  In  hunters  and  gatherers, 
where  there  is  an  adequate  supply  of  game 
animal  protein  of  high  quality,  one  expects  the 
nutritional  substratum  would  be  good.  (4) 
Density-dependent  factors  are  more  likely  to 
be  related  to  large,  stable  populations  than  to 
migratory  peoples.  (5)  Many  of  the  hunter- 
gatherers  that  we  see  now  have  been  pushed 
into  areas  that  are  marginal,  not  only  in  terms 
of  productivity,  but  also  in  terms  of  their  being 
unhealthy  and  uncomfortable. 

Isaac:  It  seems  to  me  that  in  discussing 
population  limits  and  in  postulating  a mecha- 
nism, say,  disease,  we  must  look  at  it  in  relation 
to  density.  That  is,  if  the  Hadza  are  indeed  in 
an  equilibrium  situation  and  disease  is  taken 
as  the  mechanism,  then  clearly  the  incidence 
of  disease  must  be  in  balance  as  a result  of 
density-dependent  factors. 

Washburn:  In  discussing  population  num- 
bers, it  is  well  to  have  a model  in  mind,  for 
example,  one  could  check  the  birth  rate  and 
see  how  fast  the  population  would  expand  if 
no  one  died,  and  then  see  how  many  die  of 
snakebite,  how  many  from  disease,  etc.  One 
of  the  reasons  for  looking  at  hunting  peoples  is 
to  throw  light  on  the  changes  that  came  with 
agriculture,  when  the  human  population 
soared.  One  finds  monkeys  in  areas  with  plenty 
of  available  food,  where  one  has  reason  to 
expect  rapid  population  increases — 16  per  cent 
per  year  in  the  rhesus,  for  example — and  yet 


the  increase  does  not  occur  under  natural  con- 
ditions. Yet,  if  food  is  put  out  for  them,  as  has 
been  done  on  Cayo  Santiago  Island,  then  the 
population  increases  in  accordance  with  the 
model;  even  though  the  natural  food  supply 
seemed  not  to  be  holding  down  the  population. 
So  the  relation  between  food  supply  and  birth 
rate  appears  to  be  a tricky  matter. 

We  should  note  also  that  the  size  of  these 
hunter  groups  relative  to  their  food  supply  and 
habits  is  very  small  by  primate  standards.  A 
group  of  80  monkeys  is  not  large,  and  groups 
of  180  baboons  are  observed  frequently.  So  I 
think  we  must  look  for  social  and  economic 
factors  that  make  small  hunter  groups  of  30-50 
efficient. 

The  data  that  we  are  now  getting  on  mon- 
keys show  that  we  have  to  be  very  careful  in 
speaking  of  a species  as  territorial  or  as  de- 
fending a territory.  For  instance,  Steve  Gartlan 
(in  press)  studied  small  monkeys  on  Lolui 
Island,  where  they  are  overcrowded.  Here 
they  are  territorial  and  boundaries  are  sharply 
marked;  hence,  this  is  a territorial  species  if 
you  look  at  it  only  on  Lolui  Island.  Howeyer, 
a few  miles  away  in  Chobe  the  same  species  of 
monkey  is  not  territorial  at  all.  According  to 
Phyllis  Jay’s  data,  rhesus  monkeys  in  the 
forest  are  not  territorial  (Jay,  1965),  but  in 
the  city — where  their  ranges  are  restricted  and 
overlapping — they  fight  and  act  territorially. 
So  if  a species  of  subhuman  primate  can  vary 
so  greatly  in  territorial  behavior,  we  may 
certainly  expect  a wide  variation  in  man. 

Turnbull:  I am  surprised  by  the  assump- 
tion that  any  environment  should  be  filled  to 
its  economic  capacity.  In  studying  a com- 
munity, the  economic  aspect  cannot  be  sepa- 
rated from  others;  and  particularly  in  thinking 
of  the  social  unit  in  relation  to  the  environ- 
ment, we  have  to  think  of  political  and  religious 
aspects  as  well.  Economically,  an  area  in  the 
Ituri  forest  could  support  double  the  number 
of  Pygmies  that  hunt  there,  but  they  need  extra 
space  for  political  reasons — for  example,  to 
avoid  conflict  with  neighboring  groups. 

Let  me  add  that  the  only  years  in  which  the 
Ik  in  northern  Uganda  and  the  Sudan  starve 
to  death  are  the  years  when  they  are  cultivators 
rather  than  hunters. 

Alland:  I agree  with  Turnbull  that  people 
need  space  and  that  this  accounts  for  fission, 


Discussions,  Part  V 245 

but  to  say  that  there  is  a religious  or  economic 
reason  for  ecological  stability  is  to  beg  the 
question.  We  have  to  know  how  they  maintain 
a population  size  without  infanticide,  geronto- 
cide,  disease,  or  other  biological  mechanisms. 

Birdsell:  We  have  frequently  discussed 
hunters  as  living  in  marginal  areas,  and  I 
would  like  now  to  single  this  out  as  pseudo- 
concept. These  areas  are  marginal  for  agricul- 
turalists, but  not  for  hunters.  I think  we  have 
had  enough  data  here  to  show  that  if  you  took 
a density  value  near  the  maximum  of  1 person 
in  1 or  2 square  miles,  such  density  can  be 
found  in  almost  any  environment.  In  fact,  I 
suggest  that  these  scattered  occurences  on 
several  continents  destroy  the  notion  of  an 
optimum  environment,  since  human  hunters 
do  not  increase  in  an  environment  as  we  think 
they  should.  It  may  well  be  that  we  are  facing 
the  problem  raised  by  Turnbull’s  Pygmy 
examples,  where  density  controls  are  invisible 
and  social,  rather  than  economic. 

25c.  The  Magic  Numbers  “25”  and 
“500” : Determinants  of  Group  size 
in  Modern  and  Pleistocene  Hunters 

Speakers:  L.  Binford,  Birdsell,  Damas,  Freeman, 
Hiatt,  Sahlins,  Washburn 

Hiatt:  There  has  been  some  discussion  in 
Dr.  Birdsell’s  paper  of  the  mystical  number 
25,  and  the  number  500  appears  to  be  another 
such.  We  are  told  that  there  is  an  amazing 
constancy  of  numbers  from  the  dialect  tribe 
in  Australia,  centering  around  500.  However, 
the  range  given  by  Elkin  (1954)  is  about  100 
to  1,500  or  2,000.  I recorded  numbers  in  nine 
tribes  near  the  Liverpool  River  of  Arnhem 
Land.  The  largest  of  these — the  one  I concen- 
trated on  and  for  which  I have  full  genealogies 
— is  about  300.  There  was  a good  deal  of  inter- 
marriage, particularly  around  the  edges  of  this 
largest  tribe.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  in  talking 
about  the  tribe  as  a dialectal  unit,  the  impor- 
tant thing  is  not  a mystically  determined  num- 
ber but,  rather,  communication  through^regu- 
lar  association.  The  1,500  or  so  Walbiri  were 
divided  into  four  communities,  and  there  were 
dialectal  differences  among  them.  Each  com- 
munity lived  separately,  but  there  were 


246  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

contacts  between  them.  Contact  and  separation 
in  these  circumstances  are  obvious  factors  in 
the  persistence  of  common  language  and  the 
formation  of  dialectal  differences. 

Birdsell:  The  basic  data  were  published 
some  years  ago  (Birdsell,  1953).  It  was  ex- 
plained very  carefully  at  that  time  that  for 
Australia,  500  was  a central  tendency,  and  a 
rather  wide-frequency  polygon  showing  the 
range  of  variation  was  illustrated.  The  number 
500  was  derived  from  taking  early  observers’ 
estimates  and  breaking  them  into  three  cate- 
gories (anthropologists,  careful  amateur  ob- 
servers, and  seemingly  untrustworthy  ones). 
They  scattered  about  as  one  might  expect,  and 
that  diagram  was  also  illustrated  in  the  paper. 
The  sample  was  too  small  to  justify  calling  the 
number  500  anything  but  an  indication  of 
magnitude,  and  I am  now  inclined  to  think 
that  the  number  is  probably  a little  too  high. 
To  show  what  magic  there  is  in  numbers,  how- 
ever, Krzwicki  (1934)  in  his  book  on  primitive 
vital  statistics — using  different  methods  and 
with  erroneous  tribal  assignments — got  exactly 
the  same  figure.  This,  of  course,  is  too  good  to 
be  true,  and  I do  not  press  the  figure. 

The  tribe  as  an  isolate  is  based  upon  a 
sliding  definition.  A genetic  isolate  consists  of 
a group  of  people  who  tend  to  breed  more 
among  themselves  than  with  others.  Now,  this 
is  a very  fluid  genetical  situation,  since  51  per 
cent  endogamy  would  make  an  isolate.  Ac- 
tually, the  Australian  tribe  is  a much  better 
isolate.  Tindale’s  basic  datum  for  precontact 
intertribal  marriages  was  14.7  per  cent,  greater 
in  some  areas  and  less  in  others  (Tindale,  1 953) . 
This  is  ample  semantic  assurance  that  the  tribe 
does  act  as  a genetic  unit.  On  the  other  hand, 
as  numbers  decline — even  in  precontact  situa- 
tions— one  would  expect  the  number  of  inter- 
tribal marriages  necessarily  to  increase.  Hiatt’s 
enumerations  are  postcontact  in  time. 

Sahlins:  Having  never  lived  in  Australia, 
I am  somewhat  confused  by  the  notion  of 
tribe.  Even  Radcliffe-Brown,  with  his  Aristo- 
telian mind,  admitted  that  neither  he  nor  the 
natives  could  tell  where  one  tribe  ended  and 
another  began.  Perhaps  someone  would  ex- 
plain how  this  concept  can  be  used  with  such 
statistical  rigor. 

Birdsell:  It  was  pointed  out  earlier  that 
Radcliffe-Brown  never  saw  a bush  native.  He 


was  dealing  in  a very  dramatic  case  of  salvage 
ethnology.  The  tribal  boundaries  are  a closed 
system.  There  are,  of  course,  occasional  small 
errors  in  the  placement  of  one  to  the  other, 
and  they  shift  a little.  The  statistics,  however, 
are  good,  and  in  most  areas  the  concept  of  the 
tribal  boundary  is  clear. 

Damas:  In  regard  to  the  unity  of  the  dialect 
tribe,  I wonder  how  far  that  would  be  con- 
gruent with  a genealogical  pool  or  marriage 
universe  unit,  and  just  how  sharp  the  edges  of 
these  types  of  units  might  be  in  this  area. 

Birdsell:  I have  tried  to  generate  interest 
among  linguists  in  doing  dialectical  transects, 
but  it  would  be  very  hard  to  tell  where  to  find 
local  groups  still  functioning  in  a band  context. 
The  layman’s  evidence  is  not  very  good.  Larger 
tribes  do  begin  to  show  dialect  differentiation. 
The  largest  ones  are  quite  clearly  in  the  process 
of  fragmenting.  The  Aranda  would  be  one  of 
these,  and  there  are  others.  So,  as  you  approach 
1 ,000  persons  per  tribe,  distance  becomes  an 
isolating  factor.  Foot  mobility  and  density  of 
communications  patterns  remain  the  same, 
and  they  simply  cannot  maintain  dialect  homo- 
geneity over  too  large  a group.  Interestingly 
enough,  this  does  not  seem  to  be  a density- 
determined  function  at  all.  All  Australians  can 
walk  all  the  places  that  they  need  to  walk 
during  the  annual  cycle. 

There  are  a few  cases  alleged  in  which  bands 
on  the  margins  of  dialectical  groups  speak 
languages  that  may  be  intermediate  or  may 
indicate  bilingualism  in  some  of  the  older 
members  of  these  bands.  Roger  Owen  (1965) 
has  pointed  out  one  or  two  cases  reported  by 
Radcliffe-Brown,  and  I have  one  or  two  cases 
of  my  own.  The  natives  usually  say  “These  are 
all-mixed-up  ones.”  But  evidence  suggests  an- 
other type  of  explanation  involving  changing 
band  territoriality. 

Dr.  Damas  has  asked  about  the  genealogical 
reality  of  the  tribe.  I do  not  know  of  anyone 
who  has  ever  covered  a complete  tribe,  al- 
though Professor  Rose  may  have  something 
pretty  close  to  this  for  Groote  Eylandt.  In  any 
case,  genealogies  or  no,  the  tribe  does  function 
as  a genetic  isolate.  So  if  you  are  concerned 
with  relationships,  it  is  the  biological  evolu- 
tionary unit. 

Binford:  I think  it  is  interesting  in  the 
genetic  material  that  a linear  distribution  may 


give  slightly  different  patterns  of  gene  flow, 
with  resultant  greater  restriction  along  the 
linear  distribution;  while  the  model  used  by 
both  Williams  and  Birdsell  is  a continuous 
space  model  with  hexagonal  exposure  on  all 
sides.  During  the  Pleistocene,  if  you  take  a 
combination  of  Leibig’s  law  (Odum,  1959)  and 
the  law  of  the  optimum  (Dansereau,  1957), 
you  find  that  many  kinds  of  adaptations  are 
those  that  move  from  one  major  environmental 
zone  to  another.  During  the  time  that  people 
are  distributed  in  any  one  environmental  zone, 
they  tend  to  be  distributed  optimally  within 
that  zone,  so  that  there  is  a hexagonal  distri- 
bution of  persons.  On  the  other  hand,  near  the 
terminal  Pleistocene—  when  you  begin  to  find 
tremendous  exploitation  of  unearned  resources 
along  the  coastal  regions  and  of  resources  that 
allow  sedentism  at  the  edges  of  major  biotic 
zones — this  is,  in  fact,  a linear  distribution.  So 
we  might  expect  to  find  a major  change  in  the 
size  of  dialect  groups  and  in  the  way  that 
genetic  changes  might  occur  during  the  adapta- 
tion to  linear  or  edge-oriented  adaptations. 

To  turn  to  the  figure  of  25  for  local  group 
size,  my  wife  and  I have  been  concerned  with 
minimal  population  figures,  as  estimated  from 
size  of  life  space  in  bounded  areas  like  the 
caves  of  the  Paleolithic.  We  have  found  a cor- 
relation between  the  presence  of  tools  used  to 
make  tools  and  an  average  floor  space  of  over 
250  square  meters.  According  to  cross-cultural 
correlations  developed  by  both  Cook  and 
Heizer  (1965)  and  Naroll  (1962),  an  average 
living  space  is  10  square  meters  per  person. 
This  suggests  that  a limiting  factor  in  choosing 
a cave  as  a base  camp  was  the  size  of  the  cave, 
which  had  to  have  at  least  250  square  meters 
of  floor  space,  or  about  enough  for  25  people. 

Washburn:  Binford  has  mentioned  the 

changes  in  population  that  took  place  at  the 
terminal  Pleistocene.  Now,  looking  back  to- 
wards the  non-human  primates,  I would  like 
to  comment  on  the  two  mystic  numbers.  We 
frequently  assume  that  as  man  becomes  a more 
efficient  tool-user,  the  density  in  any  particular 
area  goes  up.  This  is  certainly  not  the  case. 
There  are  many  species  of  monkeys  that  live 
at  a much  higher  density  than  does  man  right 
down  until  the  origin  of  agriculture.  Two 
hundred  animals  per  square  mile  is  a normal 
figure  for  many  of  the  forest  monkeys.  So  we 


Discussions,  Part  V 247 

might  consider  whether,  in  fact,  the  hunting 
way  of  life  may  greatly  have  reduced  the 
density  of  our  ancestors,  which  is  the  opposite 
of  the  traditional  view. 

A second  point  is  that  the  number  of  human 
beings  estimated  for  the  Pleistocene — ten  mil- 
lion is  a common  estimate — is  also  much  less 
than  for  any  of  the  non-human  primates.  We 
tried  to  get  an  estimate  for  baboons  and  came 
up  with  something  on  the  order  of  forty  million 
baboons  in  the  savannah  of  Africa  alone — com- 
peting, you  see,  with  only  a small  part  of  the 
estimated  ten  million  human  beings.  Again, 
there  is  the  suggestion  that  for  some  reason  the 
particular  way  of  life  of  man  leads  to  many 
fewer  people  than  is  the  case  with  the  non- 
human primates. 

As  regards  local  group  size,  25  is  much  less 
than  for  many  of  the  non-human  primates.  So 
one  needs  an  explanation  for  why  25 — granting 
a great  deal  of  variation  - is  a relevant  and 
fairly  constant  figure.  In  the  non-human 
primates,  there  is,  of  course,  no  correlate  for 
the  number  500  or  for  the  tribe.  There  really 
is  something  new  in  this. 

I suggest  that  the  adaptation  of  man  is  such 
that  it  determines  the  number  of  small  groups, 
determines  mobility  between  them  (involving 
language,  which  is  also  really  new),  and  leads 
to  one  species  living  over  an  area  so  large  as  to 
preclude  adaptation  to  local  disease  and  diet 
in  the  sense  in  which  monkeys  are  adapted  to 
them.  Man  has  moved  through  areas  that  are 
so  diverse  in  diet  and  disease  that  he  has  had 
to  adapt  culturally,  rather  than  biologically. 
In  terms  of  diet  especially,  I suspect  that  there 
are  very  few  areas  of  the  world  that  will  sup- 
port many  human  beings  unless  they  cook 
food,  carry  water,  and  use  other  such  cultural 
devices.  So  my  suggestion,  in  general,  is  that 
the  success  of  the  mobile  hunting  adaptation 
is  paid  for  in  non-adaptation  to  local  disease 
and  diet,  if  we  take  the  monkeys  and  apes  as 
standards  of  efficient  local  adaptation. 

Birdsell:  I think  that  if  we  visualize  the 
bipedal  niche  as  involving  essentially  a partially 
carnivorous  diet,  then  we  can  see  that  such  a 
relatively  expensive  diet  will  cause  a reduction 
in  numbers.  But  it  may  be  that  this  is  a good 
niche  because  in  a number  of  critical  areas  in 
the  Old  World  tropics  a little  meat  will  carry 
one  across  an  otherwise  dangerous  period  of 


248  Demography  and  Population  Ecology 

the  year.  In  other  words,  man  gave  up  density 
for  plasticity  and,  consequently,  remains  a 
single  species. 

Mr.  Gardner  was  good  enough  this  morning 
to  give  me  three  more  groups  of  generalized 
hunters  in  India  whose  groups  are  said  to  be 
of  the  magnitude  of  25.  I do  not  know  whether 
to  ask  Mr.  Freeman  if  he  still  stands  by  the 
idea  that  his  butchering  sites  suggest  groups  of 
25  in  the  Mindel,  but  perhaps  he  will  comment 
on  that  later.  Nonetheless,  there  is  no  reason 
why  this  group  size  should  not  have  very  great 
antiquity,  since  it  is  presumably  a basic  mini- 
mum social  structure.  And  I suggest  that  both 
this  and  the  dialectical  tribe  can  be  projected 
backward  in  imagination  a long  distance.  The 
dialectical  tribe  depends  on  speech  as  well  as 
on  feet,  so  one  must  limit  its  projection  to  the 
range  within  which  one  thinks  symbolic 
communication  existed. 

Freeman:  The  evidence  from  the  site  of 
Torralba,  to  which  Dr.  Birdsell  refers,  is  de- 
rived from  the  analysis  of  materials  from  a 
single  occupation  level.  The  figure  of  25  people 
was  my  tentative  estimate  of  the  possible  mini- 
mum number  commensurate  with  the  pat- 
terned distribution  of  materials  in  that  occupa- 
tion, and  of  course  involves  numerous  assump- 
tions about  duration  of  occupation  and  other 
factors.  I would  not  want  to  go  on  record  as 
suggesting  that  during  the  Acheulian — or  even 
at  Torralba  alone — the  mean  band  size  was 
25  active  people.  But  I would  definitely  say 
that  figures  of  that  order  of  magnitude  and 
even  larger  ones  are  not  excluded  by  the 
evidence  at  hand. 


25d.  Pleistocene  Family  Planning 
Speakers:  Deevey,  Whiting 

Deevey:  Let  me  note  first  the  previously 
unsuspected  importance  to  anthropology  and 
archeology  of  quantitative  data  on  age  at 
death.  It  is  the  most  easily  observed  and,  in 
some  respects,  the  most  informative  single 
statistic  that  one  can  get  in  studying  ancient 
or  primitive  demography.  My  own  treatment 
of  this,  published  in  Scientific  American  (Deevey, 
i960)  some  years  ago,  was  not  very  professional, 
but  it  is  the  kind  of  calculation  that  is  borne 


out  by  the  papers  we  have  heard  here.  If  one 
is  prepared  to  assume  that  over  long  times  and 
wide  areas  during  the  Pleistocene  human  popu- 
lations were  in  some  sort  of  equilibrium,  and 
Dr.  Birdsell  makes  this  point  seem  defensible — 
and  if  it  is  also  assumed  that  about  half  the 
children  died  before  sexual  maturity,  then  to 
maintain  the  population  at  a steady  state  re- 
quires that  the  number  of  children  born  per 
parous  female  be  of  the  order  of  four — two  to 
maintain  the  population  and  two  to  make  up 
for  the  infant  mortality  rate.  Now,  the  avail- 
able data  indicate  that  for  a large  population, 
under  any  ordinary  circumstances,  the  mean 
number  of  children  born  during  a female’s 
lifetime  is  of  the  order  of  eight.  So  it  would 
appear  that  over  a long  period  of  the  Pleisto- 
cene there  was  a degree  of  population  control 
and  family  planning  that  one  would  not  have 
attributed  to  primitive  man  until  very  recently. 

We  have  heard  that  female  infanticide  among 
particularly  disadvantaged  hunting'  popula- 
tions like  the  Arctic  Eskimo  is,  perhaps,  the 
most  important  mode  of  limiting  family  size. 
I doubt  that  that  is  a universal  method.  There 
are  other  devices,  including  certain  drugs  that 
decrease  the  ovulation  rate.  And  it  is  not  evi- 
dent on  the  face  of  it  that,  to  use  Dr.  Birdsell’s 
figures,  15-50  per  cent  limitation  by  female 
infanticide  would  make  up  the  difference 
between  eight  and  four. 

Given  this  steady-state  system,  in  which  the 
family  size  is  maintained  in  approximate  equili- 
brium, one  may  ask  what  determines  this.  Here 
I think  anthropologists  have  been  misled  by  a 
professional  argument  within  ecology  on  the 
dependence  of  population  density  upon  food 
supply.  Those  who  make  use  of  Wynne- 
Edwards’  book  (Wynne-Edwards,  1962)  are, 
I suspect,  unaware  that  it  centers  around  an 
argument  between  British  ornithologists  and 
a group  of  Australian  economic  entomologists 
as  to  whether  or  not  climate  is  the  main  control 
on  the  population  density  of  insects.  Much  of 
this  seems  irrelevant  to  anthropology,  since 
insects  are  not  vertebrates.  I would  recom- 
mend that  anthropologists  looking  for  com- 
parative information  on  limitation  of  popula- 
tion size  among  vertebrates,  especially  terri- 
torial vertebrates,  look  at  David  Lack’s  books 
(1954,  i960).  The  population  sizes  maintained 
are  not  atypical  for  primates  generally. 


It  certainly  looks  as  though  a modal  band 
size  of  25  is  reasonable,  and  I might  cite  Star 
Carr  as  an  instance  (Clark,  1954)  in  which 
archeological  finds  support  figure  for  the  Meso- 
lithic. And  the  common  tribal  size  of  500, 
mentioned  repeatedly  in  this  discussion, 
matches  Livi’s  data  for  the  mean  size  of 
medieval  Apennine  hill  villages  (1949).  Now, 
it  seems  unlikely — in  view  of  what  we  have 
heard  about  the  Pygmy,  the  Hadza,  and 
others — that  it  was  purely  the  food  supply 
that  set  these  size  limits.  Social  forces  (what- 
ever that  means)  seem  to  be  much  more  rele- 
vant both  for  man  and  for  other  vertebrates. 
The  environment,  of  course,  sets  upper  limits, 
but  these  are,  in  fact,  almost  never  reached. 
Instead,  the  limitation  falls  at  a much  lower 
level  through  such  bottlenecks  as  social  inter- 
action, territoriality,  and  antagonisms. 

After  a remarkably  long  period  during  which 
we  can  assume  populations  to  have  been  in 
equilibrium  and  well  below  the  carrying 
capacity  of  the  environment,  something  quite 
extraordinary  happened.  Food-producing  was 
invented,  and  since  that  time  the  hunter- 
gatherers  have  come  to  see  themselves  as  disad- 
vantaged relative  to  others,  bringing  all  sorts 
of  psychological  and  cultural  compensations 
into  existence.  This  means  that  it  is  impossible, 
strictly  speaking,  to  study  Pleistocene  ecology 
by  anthropological  methods.  However,  I sus- 
pect that  most  of  the  anthropologists  working 
with  primitive  peoples  around  the  world  are 
not  working  with  hunter-gatherers  but,  rather, 
with  agricultural  peoples  at  various  levels  of 
technology.  So  great  opportunities  exist  for 
applying  much  more  quantitative  thinking  to 
the  time  and  stage  of  the  origin  of  agriculture. 

We  seem  to  know  a great  deal  all  of  a sudden 
about  the  amount  of  land  under  cultivation  at 
one  time  in  slash-and-burn  agriculture.  But 


Discussions,  Part  V 249 

none  of  this  is  published  in  any  form  that  an 
ecologist  can  use.  At  least  I have  been  unable 
to  find  more  than  a handful  of  relevant  data 
to  indicate,  even  roughly,  the  average  length 
of  the  fallowing  cycle  in  slash-and-burn  prac- 
tice. The  reason,  of  course,  is  that  anthropolo- 
gists— although  they  have  learned  to  count  and 
weigh  things — have  not  yet  learned  to  pay 
attention  to  land  areas  and  time  cycles.  So  the 
perfectly  elementary  question  as  to  how  much 
land  is  supporting  people  is  a difficult  one  to 
answer,  even  though  it  is  just  a first  approach 
to  the  question  of  ecology.  This  applies  with 
even  greater  force  to  those  studying  hunter- 
gatherers.  Regardless  of  what  the  people  say 
about  their  boundaries,  the  plants  and  animals 
that  they  collect  do  have  an  areal  distribution. 
And  we  can  never  get  very  far  with  input- 
output  economics  or  estimates  of  productivity 
until  we  can  get  caloric  data  on  particular  land 
areas. 

Whiting:  I want  to  ask  Dr.  Deevey  about 
the  figure  of  eight  children  per  mother.  What 
assumptions  are  made  about  the  spacing  of 
children  in  arriving  at  this  average?  I ask  this 
in  order  to  compare  it  with  the  average  spacing 
among  hunters,  which  comes  to  about  four  years. 

Deevey:  The  figure  is  an  empirical  finding 
for  French  Canada  and  large  segments  of  the 
Brazilian  population.  Both  sets  of  data  are 
from  Lorimer’s  original  Unesco  publication. 
This  takes  into  account  all  women  subject  to 
bearing  children,  multiple  births,  etc. 

Whiting:  I understand  that  the  average 
spacing  in  sedentary  populations  is  about  two 
years,  so  I assume  that  the  hunter’s  average  of 
four  years  would  cut  down  the  total  number 
of  children  born. 

Deevey:  That  was  my  original  point;  i.e., 
that  there  are  spacing  devices  at  work  in  hunter 
populations. 


Part  VI 

Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


Traces  of  Pleistocene  Hunters : 
An  East  African  Example 


GLYNN  L.  ISAAC 


Anthropological  interest  in  peoples  that  subsist 
solely  on  hunted  and  foraged  foodstuffs  has 
long  been  heightened  by  the  notion  that  these 
people  are  in  some  sense  survivors  from  the 
primitive  condition  of  all  mankind.  Today  this 
hypothesis — like  the  hunting  peoples  them- 
selves— is  so  hedged  about  by  reservations  and 
restrictions,  that  it  no  longer  has  much  value. 
However,  the  conviction  remains  that  com- 
parative anthropological  information  con- 
cerning hunters  is  of  relevance  to  prehistorians 
as  an  aid  to  the  interpretation  of  archeological 
evidence.  The  range  of  social  and  economic 
patterns  observed  among  the  “foraging” 
peoples  of  historic  times  certainly  provides  a 
valuable  source  of  data  for  assessing  the  degree 
of  contrast  between  this  way  of  life  and  that  of 
farming  peoples  (see  Whiting,  Chapter  35a, 
this  volume).  Comparisons  of  the  behavior  of 
modern  “foraging”  peoples  with  that  of  other 
primates  have  the  advantage  that  the  subsis- 
tence base  is  reduced  as  nearly  as  possible  to  a 
common  factor  for  all  species.  Thus,  although 
simple  analogies  have  in  the  past  generally 
proved  more  misleading  than  useful,  broad 
comparative  studies  certainly  have  great  im- 
portance for  establishing  perspective  in  pre- 
history. 

It  scarcely  requires  emphasis  that  neither 
the  behavioral  science  of  primatologists,  nor 


that  of  anthropologists  can  replace  archeology 
as  a means  of  discovering  the  actual  evolu- 
tionary pathways  that  human  behavior  has 
followed  during  the  course  of  its  development. 
However,  prehistorians  have  passed  through 
oscillating  phases  of  attachment  to,  and  divorce 
from,  these  other  disciplines,  and  there  is  real 
need  to  consider  these  oscillations,  and  deter- 
mine afresh  what  kind  of  interrelationship  will 
be  most  fruitful  for  all  disciplines. 

Darwinian  evolutionary  theory  created  an 
initial  phase  of  uncritical  exuberance  among 
prehistorians  and  anthropologists.  Contem- 
porary hunter-gatherers  were  viewed  as  “living 
fossils,”  surviving  from  more  or  less  remote 
periods,  while  Pleistocene  archeological  evi- 
dence was  commonly  seen  as  a manifestation 
of  behavior  analogous  in  detail  with  that  of 
some  convenient  contemporary  “primitive” 
group.  Thus  Sollas,  writing  a general  tract  in 
191 1 on  “Ancient  Hunters,”  felt  it  appropriate 
to  intersperse  chapters  dealing  with  Tas- 
manians, Australian  aborigines,  and  Eskimos 
with  the  chapters  dealing  with  the  Lower, 
Middle,  and  Upper  Paleolithic  respectively. 
This  kind  of  thinking  has  resulted  in  a strong 
reaction  away  from  oversimplification  and  mis- 
leading analogy.  During  much  of  this  century, 
prehistorians  have  confined  their  researches  to 
the  study  of  stone  tools  and  the  factual  content 


253 


254  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

of  the  Pleistocene  prehistory  of  the  “Old 
World”  has  come  to  be  expressed  almost  ex- 
clusively in  the  technical  terms  of  stone-tool 
morphology  (Sackett,  1965,  1966). 

Considerations  of  activities  other  than  tool- 
making tended  to  become  a minor,  semi- 
disrespectable  adjunct  to  the  interpretation  of 
selected  artifacts.  Clearly  the  results  of  highly 
technical  artifact  studies  have  only  a limited 
contribution  to  make  to  our  understanding  of 
the  evolution  of  human  behavior  as  a whole. 
Hence  there  has  been  in  the  last  decade  a 
revival  of  interest  in  obtaining,  by  rigorous 
archeological  field  work,  actual  evidence  to  be 
used  as  a basis  for  reconstructing  total  patterns 
of  human  behavior  during  the  Pleistocene. 
Some  of  the  requirements  and  problems  of  such 
archeological  investigations  are  outlined  in  J. 
D.  Clark’s  contribution  to  this  symposium 
(Chapter  30).  Lewis  Binford  and  L.  G.  Free- 
man, Jr.  (Chapter  28  and  27,  this  volume), 
have  given  valuable  comments  on  the  role  of 
ethnographic  data  in  modern  behavior-oriented 
archeological  studies. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  contributions  of 
ethnography  and  primate  ethology  can  be  use- 
fully divided  into  three  components:  (1)  Com- 
parative study  helps  to  establish  the  terms  of 
reference  for  an  archeological  inquiry,  i.e., 
specific  hypotheses  can  be  formulated  for 
testing.  (2)  Ethnographic  data  often  provides 
inspiration  for  the  interpretation  of  archeo- 
logical evidence,  the  significance  of  which 
might  otherwise  be  obscure.  (3)  The  applica- 
tion of  archeological  methods  to  ethnographic 
material  can  test  the  validity  and  limitations 
of  archeological  inferences. 

Elsewhere  in  this  symposium,  L.  Binford  has 
stressed  the  point  that  archeological  deductions 
must  stand  on  their  own  merit  as  verifiable 
hypotheses,  regardless  of  the  existence  of  close 
modern  analogies.  Nonetheless,  it  remains  true 
that  the  most  useful  and  economic  hypotheses 
will  normally  be  suggested  by  a knowledge  of 
situations  that  are  more  completely  docu- 
mented than  prehistoric  ones  ever  can  be. 
Further,  there  are  certain  types  of  semi- 
quantitative  information  obtained  by  archeo- 
logical methods  which  can  only  be  used  as  a 
basis  for  behavioral  reconstructions  if  they  are 
“calibrated”  by  reference  to  contemporary 
observations.  Relationships  between  size  of 


occupation  area  and  size  of  occupying  group 
are  of  this  kind,  but  have  only  rarely  been 
systematically  observed. 

It  must  be  emphasized  that  many  topics  of 
interest  to  anthropologists  and  primatologists 
are  in  general  not  amenable  to  archeological 
investigation.  Kinship  systems  and  marriage 
arrangements,  which  are  prominent  subject 
matter  in  this  symposium,  can  scarcely  be 
considered  in  relation  to  the  archeological  evi- 
dence for  the  Pleistocene.  It  is  necessary  in 
planning  archeological  investigation  to  con- 
sider what  questions  it  is  legitimate  to  ask  from 
the  evidence  available  and  then  to  attack  these 
questions  incisively,  while  remaining  alert  to 
other  possibilities  that  may  emerge.  Washburn 
(1965)  and  DeVore  and  Washburn  (1963)  dis- 
cussed certain  questions  which  arose  from 
observation  of  apparently  consistent  differences 
between  primate  and  human  social  and  eco- 
logical patterns.  These  questions  were  speci- 
fically chosen  as  being  potentially  answerable 
from  the  archeological  record.  They  included 
such  matters  as  the  existence  of  “home  bases,” 
the  size  of  cohabiting  groups,  the  magnitude 
of  territorial  ranges,  and  population  densities. 
These  are  all  legitimate  meaningful  questions 
and  their  explicit  formulation  has  helped  to 
clarify  some  of  the  issues  with  which  contem- 
porary prehistory  must  concern  itself. 

The  remainder  of  this  contribution  is  de- 
voted to  an  outline  presentation  of  some  aspects 
of  a specific  investigation,  given  in  order  (1)  to 
illustrate  some  of  the  features  of  archeological 
evidence  concerning  Pleistocene  hunters;  (2)  to 
provide  examples  of  the  use  of  comparative 
data  in  archeological  inference;  (3)  to  indicate 
some  of  the  archeologist’s  special  requirements 
for  ethnographic  data  of  various  kinds  not 
generally  recorded.  The  example  presented  is 
based  on  the  author’s  work  on  the  archeological 
evidence  stratified  in  a “Middle  Pleistocene” 
sedimentary  formation  at  Olorgesailie  in 
Kenya. 

Preservation,  Samples,  and  Hypotheses 

Detailed  investigation  of  archeological  evi- 
dence for  hominid  behavior  during  the  earlier 
portion  of  the  Pleistocene  is  only  possible  in 
rare  localities  where  favorable  geological 


Isaac  Traces  of  Pleistocene  Hunters:  An  East  African  Example  255 


circumstanceshave  preserved  primary  patterned 
associations  of  fossil  artifacts  and  food  remains. 
Such  preservation  occurs  mainly  in  relatively 
moist  topographic  depressions  where  continual 
deposition  of  fine-grained  sediments  has  oc- 
curred. Olduvai  Gorge,  Kalambo  Falls,  Isimila, 
Torralba,  and  Olorgesailie  are  all  similar  in 
this  regard  (Howell  and  Clark,  1963).  Thus  it 
can  be  expected  that  situations  with  satisfac- 
tory preservation  of  evidence  might  constitute 
a very  biased  “sample”  of  the  totality  which 
they  are  used  to  represent.  For  the  Upper 
Pleistocene  subperiod,  cave  sites  probably  con- 
stitute an  analogously  biased  sample.  It  is 
difficult  at  present  to  assess  the  importance  of 
such  environmental  bias  in  the  evidence,  but 
it  has  to  be  kept  in  mind.  The  material  which 
we  have  at  present  relates  directly  only  to 
specific  topographic  situations.  To  take  an 
example  on  a large  scale — the  prominence  of 
East  Africa  as  a source  of  evidence  concerning 
early  hominids  is  at  least  in  part  a consequence 
of  this  selective  preservation  bias.  Numerous 
suitable  Lower  and  Middle  Pleistocene  sedi- 
mentary formations  are  exposed  there  and 
have  yielded  a wealth  of  fossils  and  artifacts  in 
primary  contexts.  But  the  hypothesis  that  the 
region  was  the  “center”  of  hominid  evolution 
remains  untested  because  corresponding  op- 
portunities for  preservation  occurred  much 
more  rarely  in  most  other  parts  of  the  Old 
World. 

The  problem  of  “sampling”  at  the  locality 
level  of  investigation  can  be  illustrated  by 
reference  to  the  Olorgesailie  instance.  The 
evidence  which  is  outlined  in  this  contribution 
was  all  drawn  from  study  of  a stratified  series 
of  sediments,  the  Olorgesailie  formation,  which 
were  deposited  over  an  area  of  about  fifty 
square  miles  in  a small  basin  of  internal  drain- 
age within  the  Gregory  Rift  Valley,  latitude 
i°  35'S,  longitude  36°  26'E  (Cole,  1963;  Isaac, 
in  press,  c).  Erosion  has  exposed  the  beds  and 
their  archeological  contents  over  an  area  less 
than  five  square  miles  in  extent.  No  archeo- 
logical material  of  comparable  age  has  been 
found  on  the  rocky  hills  that  constitute  the 
dominant  topography  of  the  area  around  the 
basin.  Hence  the  sites  investigated  at  Olorge- 
sailie represent  exclusively  a sample  of  activities 
within  the  special  environment  of  the  alluvial 
flats  surrounding  a small  lake,  and  even  the 


sample  within  this  restricted  situation  is  drawn 
from  a small,  possibly  non-representative  seg- 
ment of  the  lake  basin. 

The  Olorgesailie  sedimentary  formation  at- 
tains a maximum  thickness  of  about  200  feet 
(60  meters),  and  represents  a considerable 
time  span  within  the  East  African  equivalent 
of  the  late  Middle,  or  possibly  early  Upper, 
Pleistocene.  However,  the  cultural  material 
appears  to  fall  entirely  within  a single  cultural- 
stratigraphic  unit  (see  Bishop  and  Clark, 
1967  for  terminological  discussion)  which  is  a 
segment  of  the  “Acheulean  Industrial  Com- 
plex.” For  the  purposes  of  this  paper,  evidence 
from  all  levels  is  combined  to  constitute,  how- 
ever unequally,  the  basis  for  deducing  behavior 
in  the  area  during  part  of  the  Middle  Pleisto- 
cene. 


The  Occurrence  of 
Archeological  Evidence 

A very  diffuse  scatter  of  artifacts  and  fossil  bone 
occurs  throughout  the  alluvial  and  sub-aerial 
deposits  of  the  sedimentary  formation,  esti- 
mated at  less  than  one  piece  per  1,000  cubic 
meters.  These  presumably  represent  the  wan- 
derings and  sporadic  activities  of  Acheulean 
men.  Much  higher  degrees  of  artifact  concen- 
tration are  assumed  to  result  from  localized 
activities  of  men  ; this  we  may  term  an  occupa- 
tion. Three  types  have  been  recognized  (Howell 
et  al.,  1962)  at  Isimila,  and  these  apply  equally 
to  Olorgesailie : 

1.  Horizontally  and/or  vertically  diffuse. 

2.  Horizontally  concentrated,  but  vertically 
diffuse  (rare  at  Olorgesailie). 

3.  Horizontally  and  vertically  concentrated 
(an  occupation  floor). 

Types  (1)  and  (2)  seem  likely  in  many  cases  to 
represent  sporadic,  intermittent  occupations  of 
great  duration.  Such  occupation  patterns  may 
not  in  themselves  denote  patterns  of  settlement 
and  movement  distinct  from  the  casual  wan- 
derings of  primate  troops  (DeVore  and  Wash- 
burn, 1963).  Type  (3)  can  probably  be  inter- 
preted as  fairly  stable  “home  bases.”  The  most 
spectacular  instance  at  Olorgesailie  is  a camp- 
site with  stone  and  bone  debris  covering  an 
area  of  200  square  meters,  and  weighing  more 
than  a ton  (1,000  kilograms). 


256  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


Table  / 

Locations 

Location  in 
Relation  to  Major 
Topographic  Features 

Number  of  sites 
Excavated  in  Surface 

Whole  or  Part  Observation 

Scree  and  alluvial  fans  at  the 
foot  of  rocky  slopes  above  the 
basin 

I 

3 

Rocky  “Peninsula”  projecting 
into  the  alluvial  flats 

I 

_ 

Possibly  near  lake  margin,  as 
indicated  by  proximity  to  con- 
temporary diatomites  or  “beach 
sands” 

3 

3 

Alluvial  flats  remote  (more  than 
two  miles)  from  the  lake 

12 

4 

Location  in  Relation  to  Minor 
Topographic  Features  and  Sub- 
stratum. (Only  excavated  ex- 
amples, the  context  of  which 
are  known  to  me,  are 
included  here.) 

Number  of 
sites 

Character 

Boulder-strewn  rock  surface 

, 

Horizontally 

diffuse 

Flat  surfaces  with  clay  soil 
formation 

2 

Horizontally 

diffuse 

Sandy  patches  along  the  courses 
of  braided  seasonal  runnels  in 
alluvial  flats 

6 

“Floors” 

Related  to  sand  deposits  in 
shallow  seasonal  channels,  con- 
text disturbed  or  obscure 

4 

3 “Floors,” 

1 horizontally 
diffuse 

Location  and 

Character  of  Occupation  Sites 

Such  information  is  likely  to  prove  a useful 
basis  for  deductions  about  the  movements  and 
general  natural  history  of  earlier  Pleistocene 
hominids.  The  Olorgesailie  evidence  on  these 
points  is  summarized  in  Table  1. 

The  choice  of  sandy  substratum  in  or  near 
the  course  of  a seasonal  braided  channel  is  a 
strongly  recurrent  feature  of  the  location  of 
most  dense  accumulations  of  occupation  debris 
at  Olorgesailie.  It  has  been  recorded  also  for  a 
Lower  Acheulean  site  at  Peninj,  Tanzania 
(Isaac  in  press,  a and  b),  and  has  been  reported 


by  J.  D.  Clark  at  Latumne  in  Syria  (1966). 
Some  of  the  Isimila  and  Kalambo  Falls  camps 
may  also  be  examples. 

The  occurrence  of  prodigious  numbers  of 
handaxes  from  some  fluviatile  deposits  in  wes- 
tern Europe  may  well  relate  to  similar  pre- 
ferences for  sand  and  gravel  patches  on  the 
flood  plains  of  rivers.  Concentrations  of  several 
thousand  handaxes  in  the  small  area  of  a 
gravel  pit  seem  more  likely  to  have  been 
brought  about  by  intensive  localized  occupa- 
tion than  by  natural  agencies  concentrating 
initially  dispersed  material. 

At  Olorgesailie  this  choice  of  sites  may  be 
partly  accounted  for  in  the  following  ways: 


Isaac  Traces  of  Pleistocene  Hunters:  An  East  African  Example 


257 


Table  2 

Occupation  Site  Data 

Site 

Grid 

Ref. 

Comments 

Average 

Diameter 

Area 

Number  of 
large 
Cutting 
Tools 

Estimated 
Total  No. 
of  Intro- 
duced stones 

DE/89 

Horizon  A 

Disturbed  by 
stream  action 

6 m. 

28  m.1 

72 

699 

Horizon  B 

Not  significantly 
disturbed 

16  m. 

200  m.a 

524 

5000 

Horizon  C 

Not  disturbed 

6 m. 

28  m.a 

21 

1000 

H/9 

Horizon  A 

Disturbed  by 
stream  action; 
possibly  palimpsest 
of  2 or  more 
occupations 

20  m. 

300  m.1 

148 

6000 

KL/67 

“Catwalk” 

Aggregate  exposed 
by  erosion,  but 
not  dispersed. 
Possibly  2 
superimposed 
occupations 

15  m. 

s' 

0 

CO 

620 

(or  less  . 

. . .) 

either  the  sandy  channels  were  bare  patches 
in  otherwise  swamp-grass  covered  plains  or 
the  lake  was  two  or  more  miles  distant,  and 
water  may  have  been  obtainable  by  shallow 
scoops  in  the  sandy  runnels.  The  camps  may 
have  been  situated  away  from  the  actual  lake 
shores  to  avoid  the  heavy  infestation  of  mos- 
quitoes common  near  fresh  water,  and  to 
avoid  disturbing  game.  Systematic  ethno- 
graphic observation  of  the  location  of  camp 
sites  in  relation  to  topography  and  substratum 
is  urgently  needed,  together  with  inquiry  into 
the  explicit  and  implicit  factors  determining 
choice  in  each  case. 


Size  of  Occupation  Sites 

The  horizontally  diffuse  sites  may  cover  con- 
siderable areas:  for  example,  approximately 
1 20  X 80  meters  for  a site  at  the  foot  of  the 
mountain;  1 00X100  meters  for  the  thirteen- 


rock  peninsula  site;  150x120  meters  for  the 
LHS  scatter  on  clay  soil  substratum.  These 
scatters  are  all  assumed  to  be  palimpsests  of 
unknown  numbers  of  occupations,  localized 
only  vaguely  in  a particular  area.  Their  size 
depends  presumably  on  the  interaction  of- 
numerous  factors — -numbers  of  persons  in  dif- 
ferent occupying  groups,  number  and  duration 
of  occupations,  extent  of  overlap  with  previous 
occupation  areas,  etc.  At  present  there  is  little 
prospect  of  getting  evidence  relating  to  group 
size  or  duration  of  occupation  from  such  diffuse 
scatters. 

A limited  number  of  “occupation  floors”  has 
been  excavated,  principally  on  the  “Main  Site” 
where  eight  occur  within  a strip  120  meters 
long,  60  meters  wide,  all  stratified  within 
Member  7,  a layer  of  alluvially  deposited 
volcanic  silt  2 meters  thick.  It  was  found  that 
the  “floors”  in  this  complex  did  not  show 
gradational  boundaries,  but  were  discrete 
patches  of  stone  and  bone  occupation  debris 


258  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

with  sharp  limits.  Such  marked  site  boundaries 
were  not  anticipated,  and  one  can  only  surmise 
that  they  coincide  with  some  former  natural  or 
artificial  limit  to  the  occupation  areas.  Natural 
confines  might  be  caused  by,  for  instance,  the 
bank  of  the  sandy  runnel  in  which  the  occupa- 
tion was  situated,  or  the  edge  of  the  shade 
afforded  by  a large  tree.  A thorn  hedge  is  a 
possible  artificial  barrier  that  would  leave  no 
direct  archeological  traces  but  would  have 
limited  the  spread  of  material.  Systematic 
determination  of  phosphate  concentration  pat- 
terns over  both  modern  and  Pleistocene  camp 
sites  may  eventually  provide  the  best  basis  for 
estimating  group  size/camp  area  relationships. 
The  data  on  the  occupation  sites  are  sum- 
marized in  Table  2. 

If  we  assume  that  the  distribution  of  stone 
artifacts,  rubble,  and  cobbles  fairly  represents 
the  minimum  area  of  a camp  site,  then  it  can 
be  surmised  that  the  smaller  sized  floors  (5-6 
meters)  would  result  from  occupation  by  a 
group  comprising  no  more  than  four  or  five 
adults,  while  the  larger  ones  may  have  held 
twenty  or  more.  The  problem  of  the  size  of 
prehistoric  social  aggregates  was  discussed 
among  the  participants  of  the  symposium,  and 
is  one  that  requires  more  archeological  and 
ethnographic  data  before  firm  conclusions  are 
drawn.  However,  it  seems  possible  that  the  size 
range  of  sites  observed  at  Olorgesailie  is  con- 
sistent with  the  pattern  outlined  by  Birdsell  in 
his  treatment  of  the  demography  of  precontact 
Australia:  that  is,  the  small,  30-square-meter 
sites  possibly  represent  occupation  places  of 
single  family  groups,  while  the  larger  sites, 
200-300  square  meters,  may  represent  “home 
bases”  of  “local  groups”  of  the  predicted  order 
of  magnitude,  twenty  to  thirty  adults.  Lee 
(personal  communication)  reports  a range  of 
camp  sizes  from  230  to  790  square  meters  for 
groups  of  IKung  Bushmen  between  25  and  30 
in  number.  The  mean  is  440  square  meters 
(n  = 6).  There  are  too  many  variables  for 
precise  equivalence  to  be  assumed. 

We  have  no  direct  evidence  for  deducing  the 
duration  of  occupation  in  sites  of  the  kind  referred 
to  above.  However,  it  is  clear  that  the  accumu- 
lation of  a ton  or  more  of  stone  artifacts  and 
manuports,  as  in  the  largest  examples,  requires 
either  a continuous  occupation  of  some  length 
(perhaps  not  less  than  two  or  three  months), 


or  repeated  reoccupations  amounting  to  an 
equivalent  period.  The  sharpness  of  the  mar- 
gins and  the  low  degree  of  rearrangement  by 
natural  forces  favors  continuous  rather  than 
intermittent  occupation.  Lee  reports  that  Bush- 
man groups  reoccupy  the  same  area,  but  sel- 
dom exactly  the  same  site. 

Food  Remains 

No  traces  of  vegetable  foods  have  survived  on 
any  site  at  Olorgesailie  excavated  to  date.  It 
might  be  expected  that  stones  used  in  the  pre- 
paration of  vegetable  food  could  give  indirect 
evidence.  Lee  and  Woodburn  have  mentioned 
“nutting  stones”  and  seed-pounding  stones. 
Similar  stones  are  recorded  for  Australia  (D. 
Thomson,  1964).  The  Olorgesailie  sites  com- 
monly contain  an  abundance  of  subspherical 
stones  suitable  for  use  as  hammers  and  poun- 
ders, but  flat  preparation  platform  stones  are  not 
usually  obvious.  More  detailed  ethnographic  in- 
formation on  the  morphology  of  stones  in  current 
use  would  help  investigation  of  this  point. 

Bone  fragments  occur  on  all  occupation  sites, 
suggesting  that  hunting  and/or  scavenging  was 
generally  practised.  The  density  of  bone  on  the 
sites  is  generally  low,  consisting  of  small  scat- 
tered splinters  and  a few  teeth.  However,  ex- 
perimental observations  suggest  that  dispersal 
of  bone  by  scavengers  and  disintegration  by 
weathering  proceed  at  a sufficient  rate  to 
account  for  this.  M.  Posnansky,  who  was  war- 
den at  Olorgesailie  1957-58,  laid  out  part  of 
the  skeleton  of  a goat  on  the  ground  and 
covered  it  with  wire  netting  to  protect  it  from 
scavengers  and  footfalls.  By  1965  most  of  the 
thinner  bones,  scapulae,  ribs,  and  parts  of  the 
skull  had  disintegrated.  The  remaining  bones 
are  so  friable  that  only  small  fragments  would 
have  survived  if  it  were  not  for  the  protective 
cover.  In  addition,  during  part  of  my  stay  in 
East  Africa,  bone  dispersal  was  experimentally 
observed.  Domestic  bones  and  bone  fragments 
were  recorded  and  dumped  at  a peg  out  in  the 
“bush.”  Scavenging  animals  removed  most  of 
the  bones  beyond  a radius  in  which  is  was 
possible  to  search  (30-50  yards) ; only  relatively 
small  splinters  and  a few  isolated  larger  frag- 
ments remained  near  the  peg  (see  also  Leakey, 

1965)- 


Isaac  Traces  of  Pleistocene  Hunters : An  East  African  Example 


Thus  we  are  not  in  a position  to  assess 
general  level  of  hunting  success  by  Acheulean 
men  camping  at  Olorgesailie.  We  do  however 
have  some  instances  where  interesting  evidence 
has  been  preserved.  Specialist  reports  on  the 
bone  assemblages  are  not  yet  completed,  so 
that  this  account  can  only  be  in  general 
qualitative  terms. 

Species  Represented 

Most  of  the  excavated  sites  have  yielded  iden- 
tifiable scraps  of  the  teeth  of  the  following : 
Hippopotamus  sp. 

Equus,  and/or  Stylohipparion. 

Bovidae  (relatively  scarce). 

Some  sites  have  yielded  fragmentary  remains 
of  the  following  groups: 

Simopithecus,  an  extinct  robust  baboon 
(superabundant  on  one  site). 

Suidae. 

Elephas  recki. 

Rhinocerotidae. 

Rodent  bones,  bird  bones,  and  reptile  bones 
including  crocodile  are  present  on  some  sites, 
but  are  scarce  and  poorly  preserved.  Fish  and 
amphibian  bones  were  found  on  a few  sites,  but 
were  not  in  concentrations  sufficient  to  indicate 
that  they  formed  part  of  the  diet.  Even  on  those 
sites  where  bone  is  comparatively  abundant,  it 
mostly  consists  of  finely  comminuted  splinters. 
It  seems  clear  either  that  the  occupants  had 
cause  to  pulverize  bones  on  the  camp  site,  or 
that  scavengers  moved  in  afterwards  and  did  so. 

Some  examples  of  sites  on  which  evidence  is 
comparatively  well  preserved  may  serve  to 
illustrate  the  character  of  the  evidence: 

A.  13,  “Peninsula  Site” : An  excavated  area 
of  about  100  square  meters  yielded  forty  equid 
teeth,  eighteen  bovid  teeth,  and  five  hippo 
teeth,  together  with  about  thirty  podials  and 
bone  fragments  which  are  possibly  large  enough 
for  anatomical  identification.  The  remainder 
consisted  of  19.2  kilograms  of  fossilized  bone 
splinters  with  an  average  weight  per  splinter 
of  1 .25  grams.  The  excavation  is  a sample  of  a 
total  area  of  a diffuse  occupation  scatter  esti- 
mated to  be  nearly  100  times  larger.  Extra- 
polation from  these  figures  is  unreliable  but 
could  indicate  that  a fair  number  of  carcasses 
were  broken  up  in  the  vicinity. 


259 

B.  “Hippo  Banda  Site”:  A former  warden, 
Mr.  Andrews,  excavated  in  an  area  10X5 
meters  a portion  of  a disarticulated  hippo 
carcass  and  preserved  his  finds  in  situ  by 
covering  them  with  a roof.  The  bones  consist 
of  a hind  leg,  teeth,  vertebrae,  and  rib  frag- 
ments. Among  the  bones  are  a small  number 
of  Acheulean  artifacts.  No  records  of  the  exca- 
vations are  preserved,  but  there  seems  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  this  exhibition  excavation 
exposed  a hippo  butchery  site. 

C.  The  largest  and  most  completely  pre- 
served occupation  floor  to  be  excavated  was 
that  of  DE/89  Horizon  B (Land  Surface  7 of 
L.  S.  B.  Leakey,  1952),  in  Member  7 on  the 
Main  Site.  The  occupation  concentration  is 
oval  in  plan,  about  19X13  meters  in  extent. 
It  has  yielded  more  than  1,000  kilograms  of 
stone  artifacts,  rubble,  and  unmodified  cobbles. 
Many  of  the  500  cleavers  and  handaxes  show 
signs  of  chipping  and  blunting  by  use.  Among 
the  stones  comprising  the  floor  there  was  a 
large  quantity  of  bone  splinters  and  relatively 
few  intact  or  identifiable’  pieces,  mainly  teeth 
and  podial  bones.  Most  of  these  belong  to 
numerous  individuals  of  an  extinct  robust 
species  of  baboon,  hitherto  classified  as  Simopi- 
thecus oswaldi.  The  material  is  at  present  being 
studied  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Leakey. 
Field  records  and  a preliminary  sorting  done 
by  Dr.  Leakey  and  S.  Mitchell  indicate  that 
more  than  800  teeth  were  recovered  in  my  own 
and  Dr.  Leakey’s  excavations.  A preliminary 
estimate  indicates  a minimum  of  fifty  adult 
and  subadult  baboons,  together  with  at  least 
thirteen  juveniles.  In  addition  to  more  than 
150  shaft  and  articular  fragments  of  long  bone 
and  very  numerous  phalanges,  tarsals,  and 
carpals,  there  were  12.7  kilograms  of  com- 
minuted bone  splinters,  most  of  which  is  prob- 
ably Simopithecus  bone.  With  the  Simopithecus 
bones  are  a few  scattered  teeth  and  bones  of 
equids,  bovids,  hippos,  and  an  elephant;  but 
these  probably  constitute  much  less  than  10 
per  cent  of  the  bones. 

This  site  thus  attests  either  continued  ex- 
tremely successful,  specialized  hunting  of 
baboons,  or  perhaps  the  massacre  of  a single 
baboon  troop.  J.  Woodburn  (Chapter  5,  this 
volume,  and  personal  communication)  reports 
that  the  Hadza  people  of  north  Tanganyika 
normally  hunt  singly  but  occasionally  band 


260  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


together  to  surround  a baboon  troop  at  night, 
while  the  animals  are  asleep.  The  baboons  are 
dislodged  by  arrow  shots  and  clubbed  to  death 
as  they  attempt  to  break  out.  This  record  pro- 
vides a plausible  explanation  of  the  special 
abundance  of  baboon  remains  on  the  site,  with- 
out involving  the  postulation  of  elaborate  hunt- 
ing or  trapping  techniques;  but  the  hypothesis 
cannot  at  present  be  critically  tested.  Wood- 
burn  and  Lee  have  also  gathered  valuable 
observations  on  the  procedures  for  cutting  up 
carcasses,  selection  of  parts  for  transport  to 
camp,  and  the  choice  of  bones  broken  up  for 
the  extraction  of  marrow,  but  more  quantita- 
tive data  on  these  processes  would  be  of  great 
interest. 


Hunting  Methods 

There  is  no  direct  evidence  regarding  the 
nature  of  hunting  methods  employed  by 
Acheulean  men  at  Olorgesailie.  Recent  exca- 
vation has  revealed  nothing  definite  in  support 
of  the  hypothesis  that  the  bolas  was  known  to 
these  people.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  how  hunters 
on  foot  and  without  bows  could  kill  large  num- 
bers of  baboons  except  by  surrounding  them 
at  night.  Drugged  waterholes  is  another  possi- 
bility that  comes  to  mind. 

Positive  evidence  of  fire  is  absent  from  the 
Olorgesailie  occupation  sites,  as  it  is  at  all 
“Middle  Pleistocene”  sites  in  East  Africa. 
Microscopic  carbon  is  present  in  silts  of  the 
formation,  and  it  may  be  that  the  negative 
evidence  on  the  excavated  sites  is  not  con- 
clusive. 

Limited  territorial  range  of  the  groups  oc- 
cupying sites  at  Olorgesailie  can  be  guessed 
from  the  scarcity  of  stone  exotic  to  the  vicinity. 
Chert  and  metamorphic  rocks  are  generally 
present  on  the  sites  only  as  small  worked-out 
stubs  or  splinters.  The  metamorphic  rocks  do 
not  outcrop  closer  than  twenty  miles  away. 

The  absence  of  any  human  remains  from 
Acheulean  culture  occupation  sites  at  Olorge- 
sailie and  Olduvai  is  in  contrast  to  several 
occurrences  on  earlier  Oldowan  culture  sites. 
It  can  tentatively  be  concluded  that  corpses 
were  removed  from  occupation  sites,  and  that 
cannibalism  was  not  an  important  practice. 

As  the  discussions  of  this  symposium  have 


indicated,  changes  in  demographic  patterns  during 
prehistory  are  of  considerable  interest  to  an- 
thropologists and  human  biologists.  Washburn 
(1965)  has  deduced  from  the  evidence  of  a 
comparative  primatologist  that  hominid  popu- 
lation densities  declined  from  a relatively  high 
number  (ten  to  400  or  more  per  square  mile), 
characteristic  of  non-human  primates,  to  the 
relatively  low  number  characteristic  of  most 
non-agricultural  human  societies  for  which 
data  exists:  for  example,  1 per  square  mile 
maximum  for  Australia  (Yengoyan,  Chapter20, 
this  volume).  Most  prehistorians  (for  example, 
J.  D.  Clark,  1965)  conclude  that  the  record 
shows  a gradual  increase  in  hominid  popula- 
tion density  through  the  Pleistocene.  Both 
points  of  view  require  more  factual  documenta- 
tion, but  because  of  the  nature  of  Pleistocene 
archeological  evidence  and  the  bias  of  samples, 
archeology  is  unlikely  ever  to  be  able  to  con- 
tribute unambiguous,  direct  demographic  evi- 
dence for  the  Lower  and  Middle  Pleistocene 
subperiods.  However,  there  are  features  of  the 
archeological  record  which  may  conceivably 
give  indirectly  the  required  indications:  arti- 
fact assemblages  may  be  found  to  show  patterns 
of  differentiation  which  are  related  to  demo- 
graphic factors  and  population  density,  in  a 
fashion  analogous  to  linguistic  dialects  (see 
Birdsell,  Chapter  24,  this  volume).  Preliminary 
treatment  of  this  problem  for  some  North 
American  archeological  occurrences  has  been 
given  by  Binford  (1963).  Individual  campsite 
assemblages  at  Olorgesailie  show  marked 
stylistic  idiosyncrasies,  perhaps  indicating  sta- 
bility of  group  composition.  When  the  patterns 
have  been  worked  out  at  this  and  other  sites, 
tentative  demographic  deductions  may  become 
possible. 

Archeologists  are  frequently  under  pressure 
to  abandon  the  shelter  of  the  technicalities  and 
indirectness  of  their  evidence  and  to  risk  specu- 
lative total  reconstructions  of  the  behavior  of 
prehistoric  peoples;  but  uncontrolled  specula- 
tion is  of  no  value,  or  is  even  misleading. 
Therefore,  in  accepting  such  challenges,  the 
archeologist  should  firmly  omit  aspects  of 
culture  for  which  he  can  find  no  prospect  of 
material  evidence  to  use  as  a test  of  validity. 
Yet,  a bold  outline  reconstruction  of  the  situa- 
tion actually  indicated  by  the  evidence  may 
be  attempted,  to  conclude  this  example: 


Isaac  Traces  of  Pleistocene  Hunters:  An  East  African  Example 


Acheulean  men  at  Olorgesailie  appear  to 
have  lived  in  groups  varying  in  size  from 
approximately  four  to  approximately  thirty 
adults,  the  smaller  groups  possibly  being  the 
result  of  temporary  splitting  of  relatively  stable 
“bands”  with  twenty  to  thirty  adult  members. 
The  “bands,”  or  individual  specialist  members, 
appear  to  have  shown  real,  perceptible  stylistic 
variation  in  their  artifacts.  This,  and  other  ob- 
served variation  (Kleindienst,  ig6ib)  might 
also  in  part  relate  to  temporary,  perhaps 
seasonal,  or  sectional  task  differentiation, 
which  may  be  reflected  in  diversity  of  com- 
position among  tool  kits. 

The  people  subsisted  at  least  in  part  on 
hunted,  or  scavenged,  animal  food,  but  the 
evidence  is  consistent  with  an  opportunistic 
subsistence  pattern  similar  to  those  observed 
among  the  Bushmen,  Hadza,  and  other  con- 
temporary “foragers,”  where  meat  is  a socially 
important  prestige  food,  but  the  diet  consists 
predominantly  of  gathered  plant  food.  In  one 
instance  at  least,  the  evidence  suggests  systema- 
tic communal  hunting  of  baboons.  Territorial 
range  was  quite  possibly  rather  restricted.  The 
general  scatter  of  artifacts  indicates  that  man 
was  present  persistently  in  the  area,  but  ecolo- 
gically he  was  probably  no  more  significant 
than  any  other  predatory  species. 

Generalizations  from  such  evidence  as  that 
of  Olorgesailie  to  wider  hypotheses  about  a 


261 

“stage”  in  behavioral  evolution  should  prob- 
ably not  be  attempted  yet.  Other  comparable 
site  complexes  in  Africa  have  been  investigated 
and  are  reviewed  by  Howell  and  Clark  (1963), 
though  none  are  published  in  detail.  However, 
the  results  of  each  hold  out  promise  that  mean- 
ingful paleoethological  and  paleoecological 
interpretations  are  possible  where  sufficient 
care  is  taken  in  the  investigations. 

The  example  given  should  also  have  shown 
some  of  the  uses  of  ethnographic  data  both  at 
the  level  of  interpreting  site  features,  and  for 
general  hypothetical  reconstructions.  It  should 
also  be  clear  that  the  prehistorian  often  needs 
a specific  type  of  ethnographic  information 
which  can  only  be  recorded  by  a worker  with 
an  “inside”  knowledge  of  archeological  evi- 
dence. Close  field  collaboration  between 
archeologists  and  ethnologists  is  thus  urgently 
needed.1 

1 . Much  o f the  field  and  laboratory  work  o f this  study 
has  been  done  jointly  with  my  wife.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Leakey 
kindly  gave  us  the  opportunity  to  work  at  Olorgesailie, 
and  helped  and  encouraged  us  throughout  its  execution. 
TheGovernmentofKenyagavepermission  for  excavation, 
while  the  National  Parks  and  National  Museum  pro- 
vided many  facilities  during  my  employment  there. 
Research  grants  have  been  generously  provided  by  the 
following  organizations:  Wenner-Gren  Foundation  for 
Anthropological  Research;  Boise  Fund,  Oxford  Uni- 
versity; British  Academy;  British  Institute  for  History 
and  Archaeology  in  East  Africa. 


A Theoretical  Framework 

for  Interpreting  Archeological  Materials 

L.  G.  FREEMAN,  JR. 


This  essay  discusses  the  proposition  that  the 
most  serious  failings  in  present  models  for 
interpeting  archeological  evidence  are  directly 
related  to  the  fact  that  they  incorporate 
numerous  analogies  with  modern  groups.  This 
has  prevented  the  development  of  frameworks 
of  theory  which  might  lead  to  an  understand- 
ing of  the  sociocultural  significance  of  archeo- 
logical residues  based  directly  on  the  compari- 
son of  those  residues.  The  use  of  analogy  has 
demanded  that  prehistorians  adopt  the  frames 
of  reference  of  anthropologists  who  study 
modern  populations  and  attempt  to  force  their 
data  into  those  frames,  a process  which  will 
eventually  cause  serious  errors  in  prehistoric 
analysis,  if  it  has  not  done  so  already.  It  is 
unnecessary,  because  it  is  possible  to  develop 
models  for  the  interpretation  of  archeological 
evidence  which  minimize  analogy.  It  is  un- 
scientific, because  if  we  utilize  models  which 
are  only  sensitive  to  the  elucidation  of  parallels 
with  modern  groups,  the  discovery  of  para- 
meters of  sociocultural  structure  unique  to 
prehistoric  time  periods  is  impossible.  Unless 
we  can  discover  those  parameters  where  they 
exist,  evidence  from  prehistory  will  contribute 
very  little  to  the  understanding  of  ranges  of 
variation  in  cultural  systems,  the  nature  of  the 
interrelationships  between  elements  of  culture, 
or  processes  of  cultural  development. 


Recent  Developments 

In  the  last  decade,  prehistoric  research  has 
attained  a new  level  of  sophistication  in  the 
gathering  and  interpretation  of  archeological 
materials.  The  revolution  that  has  taken  place 
is  a twofold  one,  involving  the  development  of 
new  methodological  approaches  to  the  gather- 
ing and  simple  description  of  data  (most  of 
which  owe  a great  deal  to  other  disciplines  such 
as  physics,  statistics,  paleontology,  paleo- 
botany, geomorphology,  geography,  climato- 
logy, and  pedology)  and  the  construction  of 
new  theoretical  approaches  to  the  interpreta- 
tion of  those  data. 

While  all  prehistorians  agree  that  the 
materials  with  which  they  deal  represent  only 
a small  proportion  of  the  materials  used  in  and 
altered  by  human  behavior,  many  would  now 
reject  the  view  Hawkes  expressed  only  thirteen 
years  ago,  that  without  the  aid  of  written  re- 
cords little  information  except  that  dealing 
with  past  economies  can  be  extracted  from 
archeological  evidence  (Hawkes,  1954).  A brief 
survey  of  only  some  of  the  modern  research  that 
illustrates  this  trend  shows  studies  exploring 
the  ramifications  of  White’s  (1959)  view  of 
culture  as  man’s  extrasomatic  means  of  adapta- 
tion and  Steward’s  (1955)  concept  of  cultural 
ecology  by  Binford  (1962)  and  Struever  (1966) ; 


262 


Freeman  A Theoretical  Framework  for  Interpreting  Archeological  Materials 


studies  involving  consideration  of  the  nature 
of  the  socialization  process  (Deetz,  i960; 
Whallon,  1965) ; examination  of  the  process  of 
cultural  drift  (Binford,  1963);  studies  con- 
cerned with  the  nature  of  stylistic  differentia- 
tion of  sociocultural  groups  and  subgroups 
(Binford  and  Binford,  1966b;  Cronin,  1962; 
Deetz,  i960;  Longacre,  1964b,  Whallon, 
1965),  and  attempts  at  definition  of  the  num- 
ber and  nature  of  tasks  undertaken  by  pre- 
historic groups  (Binford  and  Binford,  1966b; 
Freeman  and  Brown,  1964;  Freeman,  in  press). 
The  best  of  these  studies  have  been  directed  to 
the  isolation  and  examination  of  the  functional 
and  processual  dimensions  of  cultural  systems. 
Much  less  effort  has  been  spent  in  the  con- 
struction of  frameworks  for  viewing  the  struc- 
ture of  such  systems.  Even  where  attention  has 
been  given  to  this  aspect  of  cultural  studies, 
research  has  involved  attempts  to  determine 
the  existence,  in  the  prehistoric  record,  of 
structural  principles  observable  in  (especially 
“related”)  modern  societies.  The  method  takes 
for  granted  that  it  is  possible  to  derive,  from 
tin  study  of  a sample  of  modern  societies,  ele- 
ments of  sociocultural  structure  (including 
whole  institutions  and  corporate  groups)  which 
are  homologous  with  those  of  the  prehistoric 
period.  Although  this  approach  may  be  an 
especially  fruitful  one  when  applied  to  recently 
extinct  cultural  systems,  it  is  likely  to  yield 
misleading  results  when  applied  to  the  study 
of  cultural  materials  produced  by  more  ancient 
societies,  especially  societies  more  than  40,000 
years  extinct. 

The  Use  of  Analogy 

In  part,  the  use  of  analogy  in  archeological 
interpretation  has  been  due  to  a desire  to 
construct  categories  of  cultural  development — 
“levels”  of  economic  organization  or  social 
complexity — under  the  assumption  that  such 
constructs  are  the  goal  of  evolutionary  studies, 
and  that  the  principles  of  the  classification  are 
derivable  from  our  knowledge  of  the  evolu- 
tionary process.  However,  the  construction  of 
such  categories,  which  has  been  called  “general 
evolution”  by  Sahlins  and  Service  (1960)  is 
really  not  “evolution”  at  all,  but  taxonomy. 
Multitudes  of  classifications  of  the  same  items, 


263 

be  they  objects,  organisms,  or  sociocultural 
systems,  are  possible  (Simpson,  1961).  Some 
of  those  are  “evolutionary”  in  the  sense  of 
being  derived  from  the  developmental  history 
of  the  items  classified,  and  some  are  not.  To 
establish  the  relevance  of  such  a classification 
to  the  evolution  of  the  items  concerned,  one 
must  base  it  on  the  historical  record  of  develop- 
ment of  the  items.  As  yet,  studies  of  the  “fossil 
record”  of  cultural  evolution  are  inadequate 
to  serve  as  the  basis  for  any  evolutionary 
classification  that  is  detailed  enough  to  be 
useful.  It  is  impossible  to  classify  as  yet  un- 
gathered data. 

But  are  the  data  really  ungathered?  It  is 
often  assumed  that  this  is  not  the  case.  Ad- 
mittedly, it  is  said,  the  “fossil  record”  is  incom- 
plete, but  we  can  substitute  for  missing  ele- 
ments in  the  record  studies  of  the  behavior  of 
“modern  representatives”  of  those  elements. 
As  Service  says,  “Certainly  aboriginal  Arunta 
culture  is  not  younger  than  western  civiliza- 
tion ; it  is  obviously  a great  deal  older,  and 
precisely  therein  lies  one  of  the  virtues  of 
studying  that  kind  of  culture”  (1962,  p.  8). 
The  assumption  that  modern  representatives 
of  past  stages  of  cultural  development  exist  is 
a major  justification  for  the  use  of  analogy. 
Curiously,  that  justification  is  a derivative  of 
the  view  that  culture  is  an  adaptive  system.  As 
Service  goes  on  to  say:  “the  aboriginal  culture 
of  the  Arunta  ...  is  ...  a form  of  adaptation 
to  a particular  kind  of  (total)  environment 
made  long,  long,  ago  and  preserved  into 
modern  times  because  of  its  isolation”  (1962, 
p.  8;  the  parentheses  are  his).  This  kind  of 
reasoning  is  misleading. 

It  is  based,  tif  course,  on  the  hypothesis  that 
like  environmental  stimuli  produce  like  cultural 
responses.  In  a very  general  way,  this  is  true. 
(There  are  a limited  number  of  methods  of 
working  stone  by  percussion.  Elements  not 
present  in  an  environment  cannot  be  utilized.) 
Nevertheless,  if  the  statement  is  examined  in 
detail,  it  is  false.  Each  society  exercises  some 
degree  of  control  over  the  influence  of  its  en- 
vironment by  exploiting  some  aspects  of  en- 
vironment at  the  expense  of  others.  No  society 
utilizes  all  it  could  of  the  offerings  of  its  sur- 
roundings. In  addition,  the  differences  in  the 
manipulation  of  the  same  resource  by  two 
distinct  cultures  are  often  great.  Two  “dis- 


264  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

tinct”  cultures  from  exactly  similar  environ- 
ments, both  of  which  are  affected  by  exactly 
the  same  aspects  of  those  environments,  and 
both  of  which  utilize  identical  resources  in 
identical  ways,  would  be  part  of  exactly  identi- 
cal ecological  systems.  This  is  really  the  same 
as  saying  they  would  be  one  and  the  same 
culture.  The  validity  of  making  inferences 
based  upon  general  principles  of  adaptation 
discernible  among  modern  populations  is  not 
denied;  on  the  contrary,  such  inferences  are 
necessary.  But  that  is  not  the  same  as  the 
inferential  process  I am  attacking.  In  fact,  it 
leads  to  contrary  results. 

It  is  known  that  modern  populations  of 
higher  animals  and  their  distributions  are  the 
result  of  a complex  historical  process  involving 
long  sequences  of  changes  in  adaptation  to 
changing  environments,  including  other  animal 
populations.  The  present  diversity  of  such 
animal  forms  is  the  end  product  of  a series  of 
developments  involving  numerous  transitions 
from  old  to  new  environmental  situations, 
either  by  population  spread  or  environmental 
change,  and  numerous  consequent  readapta- 
tions. In  addition  to  this  process,  the  comple- 
mentary development  of  a variety  of  new 
“ways  of  making  a living  . . . examplified  in 
the  phenomenon  of  adaptive  radiation”  (Simp- 
son, 1961,  pp.  14-15)  also  played  a large  part. 
Competition  for  resources  resulted  either  in 
differentiation  of  forms,  often  involving  in- 
creasing specialization  in  the  utilization  of 
specific  resources,  or  in  the  disappearance  of 
all  but  one  form  from  the  environmental  locus 
of  competition  (Simpson,  1961,  pp.  16-17). 

Sociocultural  systems,  like  animal  popula- 
tions, have  tended  to  regional-and-resource 
specialization  during  the  course  of  human 
history.  New  ways  of  making  a living  have 
occurred  at  the  same  time:  one  can  certainly 
speak  of  the  dispersal  of  food-production  as  an 
example  of  an  adaptive  radiation.  Any  such 
radiation  alters  the  interaction  between  mem- 
bers of  the  invaded  natural  community  in  some 
way  (Simpson,  1961,  p.  10).  In  the  case  of  the 
spread  of  food-production,  the  process  of  clear- 
ing land  for  planting,  among  other  factors, 
altered  the  size  and  nature  of  animal  com- 
munities, and  thus  altered  the  possibility  for 
hunter-gatherers  in  competition  with  agricul- 
turalists to  survive.  At  the  present  time,  hunt- 


ing and  gathering  adaptations  tend  to  exist  in 
situations  which  are  undesirable  to  food-pro- 
ducing peoples.  Where  hunter-gatherers  sur- 
vive in  environments  utilized  by  food  pro- 
ducers, they  have  usually  had  to  specialize  in 
the  extraction  of  kinds  of  resources  least  af- 
fected by  food-production.  They  must,  in  fact, 
be  totally  unrepresentative  of  the  sorts  of 
hunting-gathering  adaptations  that  existed 
before  the  advent  of  food  production. 

Another  line  of  reasoning  that  militates 
against  Service’s  hypothesis  is  based  simply  on 
the  logical  limits  to  prediction  from  a limited 
sample.  Hunting-gathering  adaptations  of  the 
present  are  extremely  diverse.  From  a detailed 
analysis  of  Bushman  cultural  systems,  it  would 
be  possible  to  predict  very  little  about  the  social 
structure  of  the  Kwakiutl.  The  cultures  do 
have  elements  in  common,  of  course,  but  those 
elements  are  of  such  a general  nature  that 
information  gleaned  from  one  group  is  not 
particularly  useful  in  interpreting  the  behavior 
of  the  other  in  any  detail.  (It  is  true  that  in 
another  sense  a great  deal  can  be  learned  from 
the  comparison.  It  illustrates  the  diversity  of 
forms  of  structural  elements  among  hunting- 
gathering peoples  of  the  present,  and  the  dan- 
gers inherent  in  reasoning  from  one  or  a few 
such  systems  to  all.)  Now,  useful  and  detailed 
analyses  of  sociocultural  systems  have  really 
only  been  made  among  peoples  who  lived 
during  the  last  hundred  years.  The  total  length 
of  time  during  which  hunting-gathering  adap- 
tations have  existed,  on  the  other  hand,  is  on 
the  order  of  two  million  years  or  more.  It  would 
seem  logical  that  Bushmen  are  many  thousands 
of  times  more  likely  to  be  representative  of  all 
modern  hunting-gathering  groups  than  all  such 
groups  of  the  present  are  to  be  representative 
of  the  total  range  of  hunting-gathering  adapta- 
tions past  and  present.  This  is  especially  so  be- 
cause most  past  groups  were  composed  of 
beings  biologically  so  different  from  present 
humanity  that  we  simply  cannot  assume  con- 
tinuities (other  than  such  broad  ones  that  they 
are  relatively  useless  in  interpretation)  between 
their  behavior  and  our  own. 

I have  not  meant  to  imply  that  the  compari- 
son of  past  and  present  sociocultural  adapta- 
tions can  reveal  no  important  similarities  or 
identities.  However,  such  parallels  must  not  be 
assumed  to  exist  before  it  has  been  demonstrated 


Freeman  A Theoretical  Framework  for  Interpreting  Archeological  Materials 


that  they  do.  The  use  of  assumed  simi- 
larities with  modern  behavior  in  the  explana- 
tion of  the  behavior  of  extinct  groups  is  not 
only  fallacious,  it  is  also  deleterious  to  research 
since  it  prevents  the  discovery  that  the  postu- 
lated similarities  do  not  exist. 


A Model  Minimizing  Analogy 

I have  attempted  to  establish  the  fact  that 
analogical  reasoning  from  modern  behavior 
must  be  kept  to  a minimum  in  the  construction 
of  models  of  past  cultural  systems.  I intend 
to  show  in  the  remainder  of  this  paper  that  the 
construction  of  a workable  model  of  the  struc- 
ture of  culture,  for  use  in  interpreting  archeo- 
logical materials  in  which  a minimum  of  ana- 
logical reasoning  is  involved,  is  feasible,  and  that 
its  application  avoids  the  pitfalls  I have  out- 
lined. 


The  Nature  of  Culture 

Any  model  of  cultural  structure  which  is  to  be 
of  utility  to  the  prehistorian  must  consider  the 
material  aspects  of  culture,  since  those  include 
the  observational  data  upon  which  he  must 
base  inferences  about  human  behavior.  It  must 
be  assumed,  for  the  purposes  of  such  a defini- 
tion, that  patterned  occurrences  of  the  elements 
the  prehistorian  studies  can  be  discovered,  and 
that  when  they  are  derived  from  undisturbed 
contexts  they  indicate  that  patterned  human 
behavior  was  responsible  for  their  existence.  It 
must  also  be  assumed  that  patterned  behavior 
due  to  biological  factors  can  be  isolated  from 
culturally  conditioned  behavior,  at  least  poten- 
tially. Last,  although  ideas  and  values  are 
important  to  the  prehistorian  as  they  influence 
behavior,  values  which  do  not  become  observ- 
able through  some  effect  on  behavior  need  not 
be  considered  part  of  culture.  A definition  of 
culture  which  satisfies  these  restrictions  is  the 
following:  culture  consists  of  both  the  total 
configuration  of  patterned  activities  (which 
are  not  'simply  referable  to  the  biology  of  the 
actors)  performed  by  a society,  including  the 
materials  used  in  or  produced  by  those  activi- 
ties, and  the  social  units  responsible  for  activity 
performance.  This  definition  resembles  that  of 


265 

Malinowski  (i960)  except  that  the  focus  of 
attention  is  on  the  end  products  of  his  institu- 
tions, and  the  “charter”  of  the  institutions  is 
equated  with  their  “function.” 

I stress  that  the  prehistorian  cannot  recon- 
struct any  activity  undertaken  by  a given 
society  unless  that  activity  produced  some  pre- 
served material  evidence.  Binford,  on  the  other 
hand,  has  claimed  that  it  is  possible  to  “recover, 
both  from  the  nature  of  the  populations  of  arti- 
facts and  from  their  spatial  associations,  the 
fossilized  structure  of  the  total  cultural  system” 
(Binford,  1964,  p.  425).  This  statement  would 
seem  at  first  glance  to  contradict  what  I have 
just  said.  I do  not  really  think  it  does.  Binford 
does  not  mean  to  imply  that  we  can  reconstruct 
an  extinct  linguistic  system,  for  example,  from 
prehistoric  materials.  However,  the  linguistic 
system  as  part  of  the  general  system  of  com- 
munication in  a given  society  is  also  part  of  the 
mechanism  of  socialization,  and  the  nature  of 
the  process  of  socialization  certainly  cannot  be 
denied  to  influence  the  patterning  of  activities 
in  the  society,  right  down  to  the  form  of  the 
tools  made  and  used  by  social  units. 

The  Nature  of  Social  Units 

While  it  is  relatively  easy  for  the  prehistorian 
to  discern  patterned  occurrences  of  elements 
and  to  infer  from  them  some  of  the  parameters 
of  the  activities  which  produced  them,  and  at 
least  some  of  the  norms  governing  their  per- 
formance, it  is  much  harder  to  determine  the 
nature  of  the  social  units  which  performed 
those  activities.  In  this  stage  of  analysis,  pre- 
historians have  tended  to  refer  to  the  patterned 
materials  they  observe  as  the  end  products  of 
activities  undertaken  by  corporate  groups  like 
those  observable  in  one  or  another  modern 
society.  Once  more,  caution  is  necessary.  In 
the  first  place  i t i s unfortunately  fair  to  say  that 
few  significant  advances  have  been  made  from 
the  study  of  modern  peoples,  in  the  ascertain- 
ment of  “the  extent  to  which  the  behavior 
patterns  entailed  in  exploiting  the  environment 
affect  other  aspects  of  culture”  (Steward,  1955, 
p.  41)  since  Steward’s  formulation  of  the 
method  of  “cultural  ecology”;  there  is  really 
no  body  of  data  available  in  analogy  with 
moderns  that  can  be  applied  to  this  problem 


266  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


without  numerous  intervening  assumptions. 
Were  usable  data  available,  even  if  all  extant 
social  groups  were  found  to  exhibit  a given 
correlation  between  social  structural  type  and 
activity  patterns,  I am  not  prepared  to  admit 
that  it  is  justifiable  to  assume  that  past  social 
groups  with  many  or  even  most  of  the  same 
activity  patterns  necessarily  also  had  the  social 
structural  type  that  is  their  modern  correlate. 
I would  expect  to  find  among  extinct  cultural 
systems  at  least  some  relations  between  social 
structural  type  and  activity  pattern  that  are 
totally  unrepresented  among  modern  societies. 

Another  criticism  of  the  equation  of  archeo- 
logical materials  with  the  activity  patterns  of 
corporate  groups  can  be  directed  at  a general 
confusion  about  the  nature  of  social  groups  that 
is  manifest  in  that  equation.  Social  anthropolo- 
gists have  long  recognized  that  not  all  social 
groups  are  corporate.  A corporate  group  can 
be  defined  as  one  which  has  a body  of  collective 
rights  and  duties,  an  “estate,”  vested  in  all 
members  and  “activated  in  diverse  situations,” 
so  that  it  can  be  said  to  be  a “multipurposive” 
group  (Fortes,  1953;  Nadel,  1951,  p.  160).  In 
addition  it  may  have  longer  existence  than  the 
life  span  of  any  member.  All  members  of  a 
corporate  group  may  act  as  a body  on  occasion 
for  the  performance  of  some  activity,  or,  on 
the  other  hand,  only  some  of  the  members  may 
cooperate  as  representative  of  the  group  as  a 
whole.  In  contexts  where  they  act  as  group 
representatives,  they  are  recognized  and  recog- 
nize themselves  as  such,  and  their  way  of  acting 
and  their  organization  then  follow  from  the 
rules  of  organization  of  membership  in  the 
group  and  its  way  of  acting  (Nadel,  1951,  p. 
1 6 1 ) . However,  members  of  a corporate  group 
may  cooperate  in  contexts  in  which  that  mem- 
bership is  irrelevant.  The  structure  of  a hunting 
party  need  not  be  based  upon  the  same  princi- 
ples as  the  structure  of  a composite  family,  even 
where  all  members  of  the  hunting  party  are 
members  of  the  same  composite  family.  Some 
of  the  dimensions  of  group  organization  must 
vary,  at  least  in  the  relative  intensity  with 
which  they  are  stressed,  as  the  group  performs 
different  functions. 

Even  though  social  anthropologists  have 
tended  to  focus  their  attention  on  the  corporate 
groups  in  society,  those  groups  need  not  be  the 
only  important  groups,  or  even  the  most  im- 


portant ones  for  the  day-to-day  survival  of 
society  as  a whole.  Special-purpose  groups 
made  up  of  members  of  one  or  more  corporate 
groups,  cooperating  to  perform  specific  tasks 
and,  perhaps,  immediately  dissolving  after  a 
very  brief  existence  are  the  basic  units  of  action 
in  society.  They  are  also  the  units  responsible 
for  the  accumulation  ofarcheological  materials. 
While  such  parties  may,  in  fact,  frequently 
coincide  with  corporate  groups,  the  prehis- 
torian cannot  assume  that  they  do;  he  must 
prove  that  they  do,  where  possible,  and  this 
involves  distinguishing  the  two  conceptually 
for  analytic  purposes.  To  be  of  utility  to  the 
prehistorian,  the  definition  of  the  “social  unit” 
must  include  special-purpose  groups  or 
“parties”  as  well  as  corporate  groups.  (Since 
the  culturally  patterned  activites  of  individuals 
can  be  as  important  to  group  survival  as  those 
of  multi-person  groups,  the  most  utilitarian 
definition  of  the  “party”  is:  any  number  of 
individuals  [from  1 to  n\,  who  contribute  to 
the  performance  of  a given  activity.) 

A General  Illustration 
of  the  Use  of  the  Model 

Theapplication  of  this  theoretical  framework  to 
the  study  of  prehistoric  materials  does  not  pro- 
duce any  spectacular  insights  about  their  signi- 
ficance. In  fact,  its  results  are  not  nearly  as 
interesting  or  emotionally  satisfying  as  the 
probably  greatly  misleading  caricatures  of 
prehistoric  life-ways  which  have  often  been 
derived  by  the  misuse  of  analogy.  It  necessitates 
the  slow  and  painstaking  isolation  of  regular 
types  of  associations  of  materials,  and  their 
formal  equation  with  activity  types.  Only  much 
later  may  an  attempt  at  functional  definition 
of  those  activities,  based  on  the  characteristics 
of  artifacts  and  contexts,  be  made.  Each  acti- 
vity type  must  be  first  be  assumed  to  be  the 
result  of  the  behavior  of  a distinct  party  type. 
Next,  detailed  examinations  of  the  formal 
characteristics  of  the  artifacts  which  indicate 
the  techniques  of  their  manufacture  and  reflect 
motor  habits  involved  in  that  process  (Binford 
and  Quimby,  1963),  combined  with  micro- 
scopic study  of  variations  in  their  wear-charac- 
teristics (Semenov,  1964),  and  analysis  of  the 
distribution  of  associated  materials  in  the 


Freeman  A Theoretical  Framework  for  Interpreting  Archeological  Materials 


clusters  may  aid  in  the  discovery  that  ranges  of 
variation  of  these  characteristics  overlap  for 
some  clusters  and  are  distinct  for  others.  This 
will  hopefully  permit  the  identification  of 
parties  which  are  multipurposive,  or  involved 
in  multiple  activities.  Perhaps  membership 
characteristics  of  a party  may  in  future  be 
determinable  from  the  recognition  of  individual 
idiosyncracies  in  artifact  manufacture  and  use. 
These  studies  in  conjunction  with  an  examina- 
tion of  the  configuration  of  between-cluster 
spatial  relationships  and  cluster  size  (the 
“proxemic”  pattern  of  each  occupation  [Hall, 
1966])  may  be  expected  to  lead  eventually  to 
the  discovery  of  the  boundaries  of  identity- 
conscious social  groups. 

Conclusions 

The  system  just  outlined  affords  a systematic, 
objective  method  for  the  control  of  selected 
culturally  significant  aspects  of  archeological 
evidence  for  the  purpose  of  intra-  and  inter- 
occupation comparisons.  It  makes  possible  con- 
trol over  activity  type,  as  an  example,  permit- 
ting eventual  study  of  variations  in  party  make- 
up or  size,  or  of  the  variation  between  func- 
tionally equivalent  units  indicative  of  activity 
performance  by  different  identity-conscious 
social  groups.  Starting  with  evidence  from  one 
site,  we  may  hope  to  extend  these  comparisons 
first  to  a few  other  sites,  then  gradually  over 
the  totality  of  the  prehistoric  period,  as  more 
excavations  conducted  to  recover  comparable 
evidence  are  completed.  This  method,  an  ex- 
tension of  the  technique  of  “controlled  com- 
parison” (Eggan,  1954)  to  archeological  evi- 
dence, offers  the  only  secure  means  of  acquiring 
an  understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  types  of 
prehistoric  institutions  and  the  mechanisms 


267 

which  contributed  to  their  maintenance  or 
transformation  (Eggan,  1954,  p.  748). 

It  is  certainly  desirable  for  all  of  us,  as 
anthropologists,  to  work  toward  increased 
communication,  and  to  make  our  findings  as 
intelligible  as  possible  to  each  other.  But  no 
anthropological  subdiscipline  has  yet  elicited 
the  laws  governing  the  structure  and  operation 
of  cultural  systems.  The  idea  that  prehistorians 
must  interpret  their  evidence  solely  in  terms  of 
inferences  derived  from  social  and  cultural 
anthropology  is  as  fallacious  as  the  idea  that 
interpretations  of  the  behavior  of  modern 
groups  must  be  derived  from  prehistory.  Each 
of  the  subdisciplines  of  anthropology  studies 
but  one  part  of  the  total  spectrum  of  cultural 
behavior.  No  segment  of  the  spectrum  is  any 
more  important  than  any  other.  All  must  be 
combined  if  we  ever  hope  to  understand  the 
nature  of  culture  in  all  its  dimensions,  and, 
hopefully,  from  that  understanding  to  derive 
general  laws  regulating  the  structure  of  cul- 
tural systems,  their  interrelationships  and  the 
processes  whereby  they  are  transformed.1 


1 . Iam  aware  that  many  of  the  ideas  expressed  here 
are  the  results  of  the  genius  of  others,  especially  F.  C. 
Howell,  L.  R.  Binford,  J.  D.  Clark,  J.  Sackett,  R.  Klein, 
and,  more  recently,  J.  Deetz  and  D.  Damas.  I suspect 
that  the  ones  I consider  original  are  also  secondhand, 
and  that  I have  simply  forgotten  where  I borrowed  them. 
The  total  configuration  is  my  own,  however.  It  was 
helpfully  criticized  by  R.  Klein,  C.  Merbs,  and  S.  Tax, 
and  students  at  the  University  of  Chicago,  while  I was 
writing  the  drafts.  I am  grateful  for  the  advice  I followed, 
and  apologize  for  having  ignored  the  rest. 

Note : Sackett’s  unpublished  paper  entitled  “Archaeo- 
logical Interpretation  in  the  Upper  Paleolithic,” 
delivered  to  the  AAA  annual  meeting  in  1965  also  in- 
corporates some  of  the  same  elements  in  a model  of 
cultural  systems.  This  paper  did  not  come  to  my  atten- 
tion until  it  was  circulated  for  the  Man  the  Hunter 
Symposium,  after  my  essay  was  completed. 


Methodological  Considerations 

of  the  Archeological  Use  of  Ethnographic  Data 


LEWIS  R.  BINFORD 


Any  consideration  of  the  implications  for 
archeological  interpretation  of  new  ethno- 
graphic data  on  hunter-gatherers  requires  an 
examination  of  the  general  relationship  be- 
tween ethnographic  observations  <and  archeo- 
logical reasoning.  Only  then  can  the  particulars 
of  any  new  ethnographic  data  be  placed  in 
proper  perspective. 

It  is  frequently  stated  that  one  of  the  main 
tasks  of  the  archeologist  is  the  interpretation  of 
the  past  and  that  the  primary  means  available 
is  reconstruction  based  on  analogies  to  living 
peoples.  Such  a view  presupposes  that  our 
knowledge  of  the  past  is  only  as  good  as  our 
knowledge  of  the  present  and  that  our  recon- 
structions are  valid  only  insofar  as  we  are 
justified  in  projecting  knowledge  of  living 
peoples  into  the  past.  I would  like  to  take  ex- 
ception to  the  above-stated  position  and  set  as 
the  task  of  the  archeologist  and  the  anthropo- 
logist the  explanation  and  explication  of  cul- 
tural differences  and  similarities.  Ethnologists 
may,  by  virtue  of  their  particular  field  of 
observation,  explicate  certain  cultural  forms 
not  directly  observable  in  the  archeological 
record.  The  archeologist,  on  the  other  hand, 
may  explicate  forms  of  cultural  phenomena 
not  generally  discussed  by  the  ethnologist,  al- 
though these  phenomena  may  be  available  to 
the  ethnologist  for  observation.  However,  some 


phenomena,  particularly  those  of  a processual 
nature  covering  considerable  periods  of  time, 
may  be  unavailable  for  direct  observation  by 
the  ethnologist. 

Adequate  explanations  are  in  no  way  depen- 
dent upon  the  data  having  been  collected  with- 
in any  particular  frame  of  reference;  ethnolo- 
gists can  and  do  use  archeological  data,  and 
vice  versa.  Cultural  systems  function  within  an 
ecological  field  whose  structural  changes  are 
most  frequently  not  synchronously  phased  with 
the  life  span  of  an  individual.  It  follows  that 
even  if  an  individual  were  to  devote  his  life 
exclusively  to  observation,  he  could  not  be 
expected  to  give  an  accurate  or  replicable 
account  of  the  operation  of  cultural  evolu- 
tionary processes.  We  would  expect  that  some 
explanations  for  phenomena  explicated  through 
ethnographic  observation  to  be  found  in 
archeological  data,  and  vice  versa.  Further, 
archeological  research  might  be  expected  to 
yield  explanations  for  some  observations  of 
cultural  phenomena  made  exclusively  through 
archeological  data. 

If  we  define  an  hypothesis  as  the  statement 
of  a relationship  between  two  or  more  variables, 
and  if  both  variables  are  observable  in  the 
archeological  record,  then  the  hypothesis 
formulated  is  testable.  It  is  only  through  the 
testing  of  hypotheses  logically  related  to  a 


268 


L.  R.  Binford  Methodological  Considerations  of  the  Archeological  Use  of  Ethnographic  Data 


series  of  theoretical  propositions  that  we  can 
increase  or  decrease  the  explanatory  value  of 
our  propositions.  The  same  procedure  is  the 
only  means  available  to  the  ethnologist  for 
generating  adequate  explanations.  Methodo- 
logically, then,  the  archeologist  is  in  no  way 
dependent  upon  the  ethnologist.  Archeologists 
are  dependent  for  building  models  upon  the 
knowledge  currently  available  on  the  range  of 
variability  in  form,  structure,  and  functioning 
of  cultural  systems.  Much  of  this  information 
has,  of  course,  been  provided  by  ethnographic 
investigation.  It  is  this  background  information 
which  serves  the  archeologist  in  offering  ex- 
planatory propositions  for  some  of  the  dif- 
ferences and  similarities  observed  in  the 
archeological  record,  many  of  which  may  not 
necessarily  reveal  differences  or  similarities 
between  distinct  cultural  systems. 

For  example,  some  observed  differences  and 
similarities  may  be  explained  by  differences  in 
preservation ; others  may  reveal  differences  in 
function  between  sites  occupied  by  the  same 
social  unit ; others  may  document  different 
occupation  histories  by  social  units  at  separate 
locations.  Many  adequate  and  accurate  ex- 
planations may  refer  to  functional  relationships 
between  locations,  material  items,  and  classes 
of  human  activities,  etc.  Flowever,  as  I have 
argued  elsewhere  (L.  R.  Binford,  1967)  the 
“interpretation”  of  the  archeological  record  by 
the  citation  of  analogies  between  archeologi- 
cally  observed  phenomena  and  phenomena 
from  a known  behavioral  context  simply  allows 
one  to  offer  his  postulate  that  the  behavioral 
context  was  the  same  in  both  cases.  In  order 
to  increase  the  probability  that  the  postulate 
is  accurate,  a number  of  testable  hypotheses 
must  be  formulated  and  tested. 

Archeologists  are  not  limited  to  analogies  to 
ethnographic  data  as  the  sole  basis  for  offering 
explanatory  postulates;  models  can  be  formu- 
lated in  a theoretical  calculus  some  of  which 
may  deal  with  forms  without  ethnographic 
analogs.  Archeologists  are  certainly  indebted 
to  ethnographers  for  providing  sources  which 
can  be  used  as  inspirations  for  model-building. 
The  crucial  point,  however,  is  that  our  under- 
standing of  the  past  is  not  simply  a matter  of 
interpreting  the  archeological  record  by  ana- 
logy to  living  societies  as  has  been  commonly 
asserted  (cf.  Thompson,  1956,  p.  329).  Our 


269 

knowledge  is  sound  to  the  degree  that  we  can 
verify  our  postulates  scientifically,  regardless 
of  the  source  of  their  inspiration.  Scientific 
verification  for  archeologists  is  the  same  as  for 
other  scientists;  it  involves  testing  hypotheses 
systematically. 

If  archeologists  and  ethnologists  are  to  over- 
come the  limitations  of  their  observational 
fields  and  contribute  to  the  general  field  of 
anthropology,  they  must  develop  methods 
which  will  allow  explanatory  propositions  re- 
garding the  operation  of  cultural  systems  to  be 
tested  by  both  archeological  and  ethnographic 
data.  The  archeologist,  independent  of  the 
ethnologist,  must  search  for  order  in  the  data 
available  to  him.  After  the  recognition  of 
classes  of  order  in  the  record,  the  archeologist 
must  then  develop  models  that  will  allow  him 
to  relate  the  archeologically  observed  pheno- 
mena to  variables  which,  although  observable 
in  different  form  among  living  peoples,  are 
thought  to  have  explanatory  value.  The  only 
other  alternative  is  to  advertise  his  findings  as 
indicating  a new  explanatory  variable  pre- 
viously not  isolated  which  might  still  be  opera- 
tive in  the  cultural  systems  of  living  peoples. 

For  example,  archeologists  and  ethnologists 
may  observe  different  phenomena  to  gain 
knowledge  of  a common  variable.  Ethnologists 
may  interview  informants  and  determine 
verbally  the  jural  rules  regarding  postmarital 
residence.  In  addition  they  may  take  a census 
to  determine  the  degree  of  conformity  between 
the  stated  jural  rule  and  actual  decisions.  These 
data  may  then  be  descriptively  summarized 
and  later  treated  as  a case  in  testing  various 
hypotheses  regarding  the  conditions  determin- 
ing form  of  postmarital  residence. 

For  many  years  it  would  have  been  argued 
that  knowledge  of  postmarital  residence  rules 
of  prehistoric  communities  was  unobtainable 
by  archeologists  since  it  was  not  “material 
culture.”  A Soviet  archeologist,  Tretyakov, 
was  the  first  to  my  knowledge  to  suggest  that 
there  was  evidence  for  the  forms  of  postmarital 
residence  preserved  in  the  archeological  record 
(Tretyakov,  1934,  p.  1 4 1 ) . His  work  was  sum- 
marized and  commented  upon  favorably  by 
Childe  (1943,  p.  6).  Tretyakov’s  argument  was 
fairly  straightforward:  the  form  of  fingerprints 
on  the  inside  of  vessels  indicated  that  it  was 
females  who  manufactured  pottery.  In  societies 


270  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

where  matrilocal  residence  was  the  rule,  there 
would  be  less  formal  variability  expected  in  the 
execution  of  ceramic  designs  within  any  single 
community  than  under  conditions  where  patri- 
locality  was  the  rule,  since  patrilocality  brings 
about  a mixed  population  of  female  potters. 
Quimby  (1956)  suggested  a similar  argument 
to  account  for  observed  differences  in  vari- 
ability between  samples  of  pottery  from  Huron 
and  Chippewan  historic  sites  in  the  Great 
Lakes.  The  development  and  refinement  of 
this  particular  argument  and  the  perfection 
of  reliable  analytical  methods  have  been  ac- 
complished by  several  recent  workers  (Deetz, 
1965;  Freeman  and  Brown,  1964;  Hill,  1965, 
1966;  Longacre,  1964a,  1964b;  McPherron, 

1 965 ; Whallon,  1 965) . As  a result  of  this  work, 
we  can  today  state  within  definable  confidence 
limits  the  postmarital  residence  patterns  of 
prehistoric  communities.  Given  the  discussions 
at  this  conference  over  the  nature  of  the  deter- 
minants of  residence  rules  and  the  degree  to 
which  patrilocality  characterizes  “pristine” 
hunter-gathers,  we  may  find  that  some  of  the 
answers  will  be  found  in  archeological  data. 

This  case  provides  a good  example  of  a study 
in  which  different  forms  of  information  were 
relevant  in  the  elucidation  of  a single  variable. 
It  also  exemplifies  another  important  point — 
the  interpretive  model  for  the  archeological 
data  was  not  based  on  simple  analogy  to 
ethnographically  known  societies.  The  model 
was  drawn  deductively  from  several  assump- 
tions and  propositions: 

1.  Females  were  the  potters. 

2.  Homogeneity  of  cultural  expression  with- 
in a group  varies  directly  with  the  homogeneity 
of  the  group’s  composition. 

3 . Many  formal  characteristics  of  pottery  are 
stylistic  and  tend  to  vary  with  tradition  rather 
than  utiliarian  or  mechanical  factors. 

The  model  developed  from  these  propositions 
states  the  nature  of  the  expected  relationship 
between  two  variables : formal  variability  in 
items  produced  at  a given  location  by  females 
and  variability  in  premarital  residence  of  these 
females.  While  the  points  of  premarital  resi- 
dence of  females  of  an  archeologically  known 
community  are  not  directly  observable,  this 
proposition  remains  a postulate.  However, 
among  contemporary  groups,  or  groups  whose 
residence  patterns  are  known  through  docu- 


ments, the  proposition  may  be  stated  as  a 
testable  hypothesis.  This  illustrates  one  of  the 
functions  of  ethnographic  data  in  archeological 
reasoning.  These  data  may  be  used  for  testing 
hypotheses  for  which  information  on  one  or 
more  of  the  relevant  variables  is  not  obtainable 
through  archeology.  While  models  for  the 
interpretation  of  archeological  data  may  be 
tested  and  verified  on  other  than  ethnographic 
sources,  it  may  often  be  more  impressive  or 
scientifically  more  efficient  in  obtaining  high 
levels  of  confidence  to  make  such  tests  with 
ethnographic  data. 

This  latter  kind  of  investigation  was  strongly 
advocated  by  Kleindienst  and  Watson  (1956) 
in  urging  a kind  of  inquiry  they  termed  “action 
archeology.”  Watson  actually  did  carry  out  a 
study  of  a living  community  from  the  perspec- 
tive of  an  archeologist  while  she  was  a member 
of  the  staff  of  Braidwood’s  1959-60  Iranian 
project.  Since  then  there  have  been  increasing 
numbers  of  workers  studying  archeologically 
relevant  data  among  living  peoples.  Ascher 
(1962)  studied  the  Seri;  Leshnik  (1964)  lived 
with  village  agriculturalists  in  India;  Richard 
Gould  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History  is  currently  engaged  in  research  among 
the  Australian  aborigines.  Margaret  Hardin, 
a graduate  student  at  the  University  of 
Chicago,  is  currently  studying  functional 
variability  in  ceramic  styles  among  Mexican 
potters.  Longacre  and  Ayres  recently  reported 
their  analysis  of  an  abandoned  Apache  wickiup 
(1966). 

From  the  preceding  discussion,  we  see  that 
ethnographic  data  can  play  two  basic  roles  in 
archeological  investigation:  first,  they  serve  as 
resources  for  testing  hypotheses  which  seek  to 
relate  material  and  behavioral  cultural  pheno- 
mena; second,  they  may  often  (but  need  not 
always)  serve  as  the  basis  for  models  of  parti- 
cular social  relations  which  are  postulated  to 
have  been  the  context  for  an  observed  archeo- 
logical structure.  In  the  former  case,  “action 
archeology”  studies  are  relevant ; in  the  latter, 
model  building  and  testing  can  be  related  to 
ethnographic  facts,  but  verification  of  proposi- 
tions would  remain  a problem  to  be  solved  by 
the  formulation  of  hypotheses  testable  by 
archeological  data. 

Given  this  relationship  between  ethno- 
graphic data  and  archeological  inquiry,  how 


L.  R.  Binford  Methodological  Considerations  of  the  Archeological  Use  of  Ethnographic  Data 


can  cooperation  between  the  two  specialists  be 
maximized  for  the  solution  of  common  prob- 
lems? In  the  first  place,  if  archeologists  and 
ethnologists  are  to  work  with  common  prob- 
lems, their  observations  must  be  geared  toward 
gathering  data  on  the  same  variables,  despite 
the  obvious  differences  in  their  fields  of  ob- 
servation. Second,  they  must  work  in  terms  of 
comparable  sociocultural  units.  Finally,  there 
must  be  a free  exchange  of  information  be- 
tween archeologists  and  ethnologists  to  achieve 
the  first  two  aims. 

The  kind  of  profitable  feedback  that  can 
occur  through  such  interdisciplinary  exchange 
is  nicely  illustrated  by  this  conference.  Archeo- 
logists have  worked  too  long  without  the  bene- 
fits of  the  understandings  of  ethnology  as  to  the 
operation  of  sociocultural  systems.  Further, 
some  of  the  work  discussed  at  this  conference 
was  directly  relevant  to  the  perfecting  of  tech- 
niques for  gaining  information  on  identical 
variables.  I am  referring  to  the  “action  archeo- 
logy” studies  of  Richard  Lee  among  the  Bush- 
men and  Bob  Williams  among  the  Birhor. 
These  two  studies  add  tremendously  to  our 
knowledge  and  are  two  of  the  most  compre- 
hensive in  seeking  to  document  the  relation- 
ships between  behavior  and  the  spatial  struc- 
ture of  artifacts  which  would  be  observable  in 
the  archeological  record.  Such  information  will 
be  very  useful  in  testing  some  of  the  propositions 
of  Cook  and  Treganza  (1950),  Cook  and 
Heizer  (1965),  and  Naroll  (1962)  as  to  the 
relationships  between  population  size  and  site 
size  as  well  as  population  size  and  amount  of 
enclosed  space  required.  The  site  maps  and 
structural  details  illustrating  the  internal 
spatial-formal  structure  of  settlements,  docu- 
mented by  Lee  and  Williams,  will  be  valuable 
in  testing  a number  of  propositions  regarding 
spatial  disposition  and  correlates  ofsocial  status. 
With  the  data  now  available  it  would  be 
possible  to  measure  the  degree  to  which  proxi- 
mity between  living  areas  in  a settlement  is 
correlated  with  social  distance  as  measured  in 
kinship  affiliations.  Exceptions  to  such  cor- 
relations and  the  kinds  of  contingencies  which 
intervene  can  be  more  easily  spotted  with  data 
like  Lee’s  and  Williams’  available. 

On  a slightly  more  critical  note,  and  writing 
from  only  a superficial  knowledge  of  the  data 
gathered  by  Lee,  some  of  the  observations  made 


271 

and  some  of  the  emphases  stressed  at  this 
conference  bear  witness  to  the  need  for  freer 
communication  between  ethnographers  and 
archeologists.  For  example,  Lee’s  site  maps 
are  informative,  yet  he  uses  them  to  illustrate 
how  little  of  the  physical  remains  of  a living 
people  are  left  for  the  archeologist  to  observe. 
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  Lee  made 
only  surface  observations  and  did  no  excava- 
tion. In  the  discussion  of  the  relative  impor- 
tance of  meat  versus  plant  food,  Lee’s  exact 
measurements  of  intake  of  the  !Kung  Bushmen 
is  good  to  have,  but  it  does  duplicate  many  of 
the  points  raised  and  resolved  fourteen  years 
ago  and  reported  in  An  Appraisal  of  Anthropology 
Today  (Tax,  1953).  Linton  discussed  many  of 
the  points  raised  here  and  stated: 

there  are  very  few  places  in  the  world  where 
people  live  entirely  by  hunting  . . . you  may 
remember  that  the  occupation  layers  of  Peking 
Man  at  Choukoutien  have  hackberry  seeds 
(*953)- 

I suspect  that  an  archeologist  actively  en- 
gaged in  research  might  have  made  many  dif- 
ferent observations  than  those  made  by  Lee. 
In  his  site  maps  Lee  does  plot  hearths  and  fire 
areas  but  treats  them  all  as  the  same.  Detailed 
descriptive  data  on  the  formal  differences  in 
discrete  and  metrical  attributes  of  hearths  used 
in  lighting,  heating,  and  cooking  of  various 
kinds  of  food  might  have  contributed  greatly 
to  our  understanding  of  the  functional  variables 
which  must  be  considered  in  dealing  with 
archeologically  observed  hearths.  This  kind  of 
information  might  help  to  prevent  the  simplis- 
tic kind  of  archeological  interpretation  recently 
made  by  Movius  in  which  the  size  of  the  hearth 
is  taken  as  an  index  of  the  size  of  the  social  unit 
occupying  the  site  (Movius,  1966,  p.  321). 

This  critical  note  is  not  meant  to  discourage 
“action  archeology”  studies,  but  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  ethnologists  in  making  such  obser- 
vations might  do  well  to  put  their  observations 
in  the  framework  of  archeological  question- 
asking. 

The  emphasis  by  the  participants  in  this 
symposium  on  questioning  certain  propositions 
which  have  generally  been  accepted  as  truisms 
has  far-reaching  implications  for  archeological 
research.  To  my  knowledge  all  archeological 


272  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

theorists  who  have  considered  the  role  of  sub- 
sistence technology  in  evolutionary  change 
have  used  a rather  simplistic  Malthusian  model 
for  population  dynamics.  The  traditional  view, 
superbly  dealt  with  here  by  Sahlins,  has  been 
termed  by  Boulding  (1955,  p.  197)  the  Dismal 
Theorem.  It  holds  that  the  ultimate  check  on 
population  is  misery;  population  will  grow 
until  the  nutritional  level  falls  and  disease 
brings  about  population  equilibrium.  The  fresh 
and  challenging  viewpoint  put  forth  by  Sahlins, 
and  less  playfully  by  Birdsell  and  Williams 
certainly  brings  into  question  many  anthropo- 
logical cliches  about  the  origins  of  agriculture 
and  animal  domestication. 

One  of  the  most  encouraging  aspects  of  this 
conference  is  that  archeologists  and  ethnolo- 
gists are  moving  in  the  direction  of  dealing  with 
comparable  units.  For  example,  archeologists 
assume  that  the  size,  composition,  and  spatial 
structure  of  an  assemblage  are  jointly  deter- 
mined by:  first,  the  size  and  composition  of  the 
social  unit  responsible;  and  second,  the  form 
of  differential  task  performance  carried  out  by 
individuals'  and  segments  of  the  occupying 
social  unit.  Such  assumptions  allow  us  to 
analyze  in  structural  terms  the  * contents  of 
sites  and  permit  the  definition  of  the  different 
tasks  represented  (see  Binford  and  Binford, 
1966b).  In  all  his  work  the  archeologist  has 
available  information  on  the  behavior  of  per- 
sons making  up  either  task-specific  work  groups 
or  local  residential  groups.  Any  social  unit 
larger  than  these  are  known  archeologically 
only  through  comparative  analysis  of  dif- 
ferences and  similarities  in  form,  composition, 
and  distribution  in  a generally  unbounded 
universe  of  sites  yielding  archeological  data. 
Local  groups  and  task  forces  are  the  social  units 
about  which  archeologists  can  get  information 
without  having  to  work  their  data  through  a 
fairly  elaborate  body  of  culture  theory. 

In  view  of  this,  it  is  very  heartening  to  hear 
at  this  conference  considerable  discussion  on 
form  and  cyclically  varying  composition  of 
local  groups.  The  work  of  Helm  and  Watanabe 
is  especially  useful  in  this  regard  and  will 
undoubtedly  serve  archeologists  as  a basis  for 
model-building. 

But  perhaps  the  major  contribution  of  this 
conference  for  me  is  the  stimulation  it  has  pro- 
vided; the  specific  data  as  they  were  presented 


were  literally  food  for  thought.  At  the  risk  of 
presenting  some  of  these  ideas  before — to  con- 
tinue the  metaphor — they  have  been  properly 
digested,  I would  like  to  offer  an  argument 
which  is  the  direct  result  of  on-the-spot  linkages 
made  between  data  presented  here  and  archeo- 
logical problems.  The  following  observations 
are  drawn  largely  from  archeological  data : 

1.  Judging  from  the  scanty  information  on 
settlements  and  from  the  inferred  functions  of 
recovered  tools,  man’s  adaptations  during  the 
Pleistocene  were  accomplished  almost  exclu- 
sively through  the  use  of  implements.  Implements 
have  been  defined  by  Wagner  (i960)  as  tools 
which  serve  to  translate  or  enhance  energy 
exchanges;  examples  would  be  spears,  knives, 
digging  sticks,  atlatls,  etc. 

2.  Near  the  close  of  the  Pleistocene  and 
during  the  immediately  post-Pleistocene  period 
there  was  increased  elaboration  in  the  use  of 
facilities  (this  is  Wagner’s  term  also).  Facilities 
are  objects  which  serve  to  prevent  motion  and/or 
energy  transfers — that  is,  fish  weirs,  nets,  pottery. 

Let  us  add  to  these  observations  some  points 
made  at  this  meeting.  Hunters  and  gatherers 
whose  subsistence  is  largely  obtained  through 
the  use  of  implements  (Bushmen,  Hadza, 
forest  Pygmies,  and  during  the  winter  the 
Central  Eskimo)  are  said  to  be  somewhat 
casual  about  death  and  nonchalant  in  their 
treatment  of  the  dead  or  dying.  An  exception 
was  the  Birhor  discussed  by  Williams  who  hunt 
with  facilities — nets. 

Let  us  now  add  one  more  archeological 
observation:  Systematic  burial  of  the  dead  and 
elaborate  mortuary  ritual  are  greatly  increased 
on  a worldwide  basis  at  the  close  of  the  Pleisto- 
cene. True  cemeteries  appear  first  in  the  Meso- 
lithic in  the  Old  World  and  the  Archaic  in  the 
New  World;  the  Archaic  and  the  Mesolithic 
are  further  characterized  by  a heavy  depen- 
dence on  facilities  in  their  subsistence  activities. 

It  is  tempting  to  make  functional  linkages 
between  the  structure  of  technological  adjust- 
ment, nature  of  status  definition,  and  hence  of 
attitudinal  involvement  with  persons  occupy- 
ing these  statuses  as  expressed  in  mortuary 
ritual.  Facilities  to  be  efficient  require  precise 
placement  in  space;  their  effectiveness  is  de- 
pendent upon  energy  flow  and  they  must  be 
placed  so  as  to  maximize  the  interruption  of 
this  flow.  Fish  weirs  are  an  excellent  example. 


L.  R.  Binford  Methodological  Considerations  of  the  Archeological  Use  of  Ethnographic  Data 


Facilities  further  require  cooperative  labor  for 
their  construction  and  maintenance. 

All  of  this  implies  that  the  responsibility  for 
coordination  of  effort  will  be  assumed  and, 
more  important,  that  stewardships  involving 
maintenance  will  be  established.  There  would 
also  be  a necessary  development  of  rules 
governing  access  to  the  facility  and  the  distri- 
bution of  its  yields.  Many  other  elements  of 
role  content  would  become  part  of  newly  de- 
fined status  positions  arising  out  of  the  use  of 
facilities  at  the  close  of  the  Pleistocene.  It  is 
also  suggested  that  emotional  involvements 
would  thus  have  been  linked  to  interstatus 
dependencies  of  an  order  unknown  in  societies 
in  which  implements  dominated  the  techno- 
logy. In  this  new  kind  of  facility-dependent 


273 

society  the  death  of  an  individual  occupying 
a structured  status  position  would  necessitate 
the  reallocation  of  his  position  to  others,  the 
retirement  of  “debts”  to  his  descendants,  and 
many  other  kinds  of  socially  defined  obliga- 
tions which  may  well  have  been  effected 
through  mortuary  rites. 

If  some  of  the  ideas  briefly  outlined  above 
should  prove  upon  testing  to  have  explanatory 
value,  the  coincident  appearance  of  cemeteries 
in  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  at  the  close  of  the 
Pleistocene  (as  well  as  some  of  the  “aberrant” 
features  of  the  Birhor)  might  be  elucidated 
simultaneously.  The  development  and  refine- 
ment of  ideas  stimulated  by  this  conference  will 
be  one  of  the  chief  profits  of  having  been  in 
attendance. 


Ethnographic  Data 

and  Understanding  the  Pleistocene 


SALLY  R.  BINFORD 


The  following  quotation  is  taken  from  the 
paper  circulated  by  DeVore  and  Lee  as  part 
of  the  announcement  of  this  conference: 

It  should  soon  be  possible  for  ethnographers 
and  archeologists  to  meet  together  and,  as  an 
exercise  in  the  deduction  of  extinct  life  patterns, 
realistically  compare  the  occupation  sites  of  living 
hunter-gatherers  with  those  of  prehistoric  hunter- 
gatherers.  It  should  be  clear  that  this  is  a “logical 
exercise,”  and  that  there  is  no  assumption  that 
living  hunter-gatherers  are  somehow  living  relicts 
of  the  Pleistocene. 

At  the  risk  of  sounding  a discordant  note  in 
a harmonious  meeting  of  people  working  in 
various  subdisciplines,  I would  like  to  remark 
that  the  pertinence  of  ethnographic  data  to 
prehistoric  research  involves  more  than  a 
“logical  exercise.”  All  of  us  are  here  for  more 
than  tightening  up  our  intellectual  muscle 
tone  and  have  some  rational  belief  or  irrational 
faith  that  what  we  are  saying  is  relevant  to 
common  problems.  It  is  the  problem  of  the 
translatability  of  ethnographic  data  back  into 
earlier  Pleistocene  times  that  I would  like  to 
discuss  briefly. 

It  is  stated  in  the  quotation  above  that  there 
can  be  no  valid  assumption  that  living  hunter- 
gatherers  are  relicts  of  the  Pleistocene.  This  is 


unquestionably  true.  However,  I would  like  to 
issue  a corollary  caveat — that  Pleistocene  homi- 
nids  cannot  be  assumed  to  be  simply  earlier 
representatives  of  living  hunter-gatherers.  This 
means  that  the  use  of  ethnographic  data  from 
the  Arunta  or  the  Bushmen  to  elucidate  a 
Lower  or  Middle  Pleistocene  way  of  life  must 
take  into  account  certain  differences  in  the 
biological  and  psychological  constitution  of  the 
hominids  involved  which  have  been  suggested 
by  recent  work  in  paleoanthropology. 

Our  typologies  of  lithic  remains  from  the 
entire  Pleistocene  time  range  have  undergone 
considerable  refinement  in  recent  years  (see 
Bordes,  1953,  *961;  Kleindienst,  1961a; 

deSonneville-Bordes  and  Perrot,  1954-56),  and 
the  use  of  comparable  typological  units  has 
allowed  comparisons  over  broad  geographical 
areas.  Most  of  the  typologies  currently  used  for 
Paleolithic  assemblages  deal  with  functional 
classes  of  tools — for  example,  scrapers  versus 
points  versus  handaxes.  The  further  back  in 
time  one  goes,  the  fewer  clearly  recognizable 
functional  classes  of  tools  exist.  This  might  be 
the  result  of  fewer  kinds  of  tasks  or  more  multi- 
purpose tools  in  the  earlier  time  ranges,  or 
both. 

Besides  function,  another  analytical  tool 
used  by  archeologists  is  that  of  style.  Stylistic 
attributes  are  those  formal  qualities  of  artifacts 


274 


S.  R.  Binford  Ethnographic  Data  and  Understanding  the  Pleistocene 


that  arc  not  directly  explicable  in  terms  of  the 
nature  of  the  raw  material  or  of  the  technology 
of  production  (L.  R.  Binford,  1962,  p.  220). 

In  the  archeological  assemblages  associated 
with  anatomically  modern  man  ( Homo  sapiens 
sapiens)  we  can  discern  clearly  definable  style 
zones  bounded  areas  in  which  stylistic  attri- 
butes are  seen  to  cluster.  Such  style  zones 
characterize  the  terminal  Pleistocene  assem- 
blages of  both  the  New  World  (Mason,  1962) 
and  the  Old  Wor  ld  (Sackett,  1966).  The  func- 
tion of  style  is  thought  to  be  a means  of  either 
group  or  individual  identification  with  a pro- 
duct or  class  of  products  (L.  R.  Binford,  1963). 

No  such  style  zones  can  be  seen  in  earlier 
Pleistocene  assemblages.  It  is  a truism  that 
handaxes  from  South  Africa,  northern  France, 
and  southern  England  are  remarkably  similar. 
In  the  words  of  an  anonymous  archeologist, 
“You’ve  seen  one  handax,  you’ve  seen  ’em 
all”;  the  absence  of  stylistic  differences  within 
major  classes  of  artifacts  during  the  Acheulian 
is  striking,  regardless  of  the  wide  variety  of 
raw  materials  used  in  their  manufacture.  It 
has  been  suggested  (J.  D.  Clark,  1959; 
Kleindienst,  1961b)  that  the  selection  by  an 
Acheulian  group  of  a subclass  of  tool  within 
some  functional  class  of  tool  (for  example, 
limande  versus  cordiform  handaxes)  may 
yield  some  information  on  style.  However,  this 
is  very  different  from  style  in  later  assemblages. 

The  stylistic  differences  observable  in  earlier 
assemblages  would  appear  to  fit  the  model  of 
cultural  drift — the  accretion  of  small  changes 
or  variations  which  give  the  appearance 
through  time  of  directional  change.  Stylistic 
differences  in  assemblages  from  the  Upper 
Paleolithic  and  later,  on  the  other  hand,  appear 
to  be  the  result,  at  least  in  part,  of  self-conscious 
symbolic  behavior. 


275 

The  point  in  time  and  the  context  in  which 
such  self-conscious  symbolic  behavior  appears 
is  a present  subject  of  investigation  by  the 
writer  and  L.  R.  Binford.  It  is  our  present  as- 
yet-undemonstrated  hunch  that  the  first  evi- 
dence of  style  clines  appear  in  the  Mousterian. 
Bordes’  type  list  of  Mousterian  artifacts,  which 
is  essentially  a functional  one,  can  be  applied 
broadly — to  Mousterian  assemblages  of  the 
Near  and  Far  East,  North  Africa,  as  well  as 
France.  But  in  using  this  type  list  in  widely 
separated  areas,  the  investigator  is  beset  by  a 
feeling  of  unease,  since  attributes  not  covered 
by  Bordes’  list  appear  to  vary  between  broad 
geographical  zones.  The  construction  of  an 
attribute  list  designed  to  inform  about  stylistic 
differences  in  the  Mousterian  is  a present 
concern. 

The  distinction  between  style  zones  and 
clines  is  important,  since  a zone  is  a bounded 
area  formally  distinct  from  adjacent  regions. 
Since  Mousterian  stylistic  variability  has  not 
yet  been  systematically  measured,  we  do  not 
know  if  the  differences  we  impressionistically 
perceive  cluster  in  the  discrete  units  which  have 
been  demonstrated  for  later  assemblages. 

The  purpose  here  of  bringing  up  style  and 
its  function,  and  of  differences  observable 
through  time,  is  to  raise  the  question  of  the 
implications  of  new  kinds  of  ethnographic  data 
for  archeology.  In  dealing  with  pr e-sapiens 
populations,  observations  from  living  groups 
cannot  be  directly  used.  (The  exception  would 
be  observations  on  the  function  of  specific  arti- 
fact forms  in  similar  environments.)  Observa- 
tions of  living  groups,  to  be  usable  for  the  early 
time  ranges,  must  serve  as  a base  line  against 
which  we  measure  differences  in  the  structure 
of  cultural  systems  and  the  psychological 
capacities  of  the  culture-bearers. 


Studies  of  Hunter-Gatherers 

as  an  Aid  to  the  Interpretation  of  Prehistoric  Societies 

J.  DESMOND  CLARK 


It  has  become  clear  to  me  while  listening  to 
the  debates  of  the  two  previous  days  that  a 
better  understanding  of  precontact  behavior, 
social  grouping  patterns,  population  density, 
and  distribution  in  Australia  and,  probably, 
also  in  North  America  and  Africa  would  be 
possible  by  making  a closer  use  of  archeological 
data.  A critical  evaluation  of  the  archeological 
evidence  that  can  be  obtained  from  late  or 
historic  settlements,  supplemented  by  oral 
tradition,  provides  a promising  means  of  re- 
solving some  of  the  problems  of  conflicting  data 
as  between  present-day  and  early-contact  times 
and  also  for  the  immediately  previous  period. 

If  archeological  evidence  has  hitherto  been 
little  used  by  the  ethnographer,  the  reverse  is 
also  true  of  the  archeologist  in  his  use  of  ethno- 
graphic data  to  help  in  interpreting  the  way  of 
life  and  behavior  of  prehistoric  populations. 
However,  the  evident  flexibility  of  the  social 
unit  and  the  lack  of  any  consistent  composition 
or  general  grouping  patterns  among  hunter- 
gatherers,  as  demonstrated  at  this  conference, 
makes  the  archeologist’s  task  even  more  difficult 
than  it  already  appeared.  Whereas  the  dangers 
of  adducing  any  direct  archeological  and 
ethnographic  comparisons  are  generally  recog- 
nized and  avoided,  the  basis  for  reconstructing 
prehistoric  behavior  must  lie  in  a systematized 
use  of  the  whole  corpus  of  information  on  hu- 

276 


man  behavior  at  the  hunter-gatherer  and  other 
subsistence  levels,  and  the  selection  and  critical 
application  of  what  is  relevant  in  this  for 
archeology. 

The  more  complete  the  evidence  for  length 
and  area  of  occupation  and  the  associations  of 
the  full  range  of  cultural  remains,  the  greater 
the  validity  for  any  attempted  interpretation 
of  the  site  and  its  contents.  The  older  the 
site,  the  more  complex  any  reconstruction 
becomes. 

Only  during  the  last  ten  years  or  so  has 
systematic  excavation  and  study  of  artifact 
distribution  on  Lower  Paleolithic  living  floors 
been  undertaken  in  the  Old  World.  Such 
studies  have  shown  that  it  is  quite  possible  to 
find  sealed  occupation  sites  that  have  suffered 
little  or  no  natural  disturbance  before  or  after 
burial.  In  such  cases  it  is  presumed  that  the 
distribution  scatter  of  the  artifacts  and  any 
other  artificial  features  of  the  site  is  as  it  was 
vvhen  abandoned  by  the  occupants.  Theoreti- 
cally, therefore,  it  should  be  possible  to  go  a 
long  way  toward  reconstructing  the  activities 
of  the  occupants  and  obtaining  some  know- 
ledge of  their  general  behavior.  In  practice, 
however,  what  remains  unknown  and  the 
variables  among  what  is  known,  make  any 
attempted  reconstructions  at  present  highly 
tenuous. 


Clark  Studies  of  Hunter-Gatherers  as  an  Aid  to  the  Interpretation  of  Prehistoric  Societies 


Prehistoric  Settlement 
Sites  and  Survival  Patterns 

Leaving  aside  butchery  sites,  I know  of  only 
one  (Olorgesailie,  Land  Surface  8) — perhaps 
two  (Olduvai,  FLK  I) — excavated  Lower 
Paleolithic  occupation  areas  that  can  claim  to 
represent  complete  occupation  units.  All  others 
comprise  excavation  of  only  a part  of  more 
extensive  units,  the  exact  areal  distribution  of 
which  remains  unknown.  In  not  a few  cases 
this  can  never  be  known  since  it  was  the  natural 
erosion  of  the  site  that  revealed  it  in  the  first 
instance.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  first  require- 
ment is  the  excavation  of  complete  units  of 
settlement,  both  those  where  there  are  no 
natural  features  limiting  the  spread  of  occupa- 
tion debris  (open  sites)  and  those  where  the 
area  of  occupation  is  naturally  confined  (cave 
and  rock  shelter  sites). 

Once  a sufficient  number  of  distribution 
plots  of  complete  occupation  units  are  avail- 
able, it  will  be  possible  to  see  the  extent  to 
which  the  association  patterns  of  the  com- 
ponents of  a site  vary  or  are  consistent — the 
associations  between  different  classes  of  tools, 
of  certain  tools  with  food  debris,  hearths, 
working  areas,  etc.  Such  different  activities  as, 
for  example,  required  the  use  of  the  La  Quina 
scraper,  denticulated  scrapers,  handaxes, 
cleavers  or  core-axes,  may  sometimes  all  have 
been  carried  on  contemporaneously  on  one 
site,  as  at  the  Kalambo  Falls  during  the  late 
Upper  Acheulian.  At  other  sites,  the  range  of 
types  is  restricted,  suggesting  a special  rather 
than  a general-purpose  occupation.  At  present 
the  interpretation  is  hampered  by  the  narrow 
lateral  spread  of  most  excavations  and  permits 
of  more  than  one  explanation  for  the  several  lim- 
ited but  distinctive  tool  kits  of  Paleolithic  times. 

In  nearly  every  case,  also — and  this  is  most 
important — it  is  impossible  at  present  to  give 
an  accurate  estimate  of  the  duration  of  time 
that  is  represented  by  one  of  these  concentra- 
tions of  tools  and  lithic  debris.  Since  there  is 
rarely,  if  ever,  any  accumulated  midden  waste 
present,  either  the  sites  were  occupied  for  a 
short  time  only  or  their  antiquity  has  resulted 
in  the  complete  disappearance  of  organic  re- 
mains, except  bone.  There  is  reason  to  believe 
that  both  explanations  are  pertinent.  It  seems 
probable  that  a site  such  as  the  Upper  Acheu- 


277 

lian  occupation  at  Broken  Hill  represents  only 
temporary  occupation.  The  same  seems  likely 
for  the  sand  bank  sites  of  similar  age  at  the 
Kalambo  Falls,  whereas  thirty  feet  or  so  of 
stratified  succession  at  the  Cave  of  Hearths 
represent  interrupted  but  recurring  occupation 
over  a long  period  of  time.  We  are,  however, 
still  without  the  means  of  determining  whether 
days,  weeks,  or  years  elapsed  before  most  of 
the  sites  we  have  were  finally  sealed  over.  In 
this  connection  it  is  heartening  to  know  that 
Bushmen  and  Hadza  today  rarely  reoccupy 
exactly  the  same  camp  site  unless  this  be  a 
cave  or  rock  shelter. 

Again,  at  most  Paleolithic  sites  only  the 
stone  artifacts  survive,  though  sometimes, 
especially  in  temperate  latitudes,  bone  is 
plentiful.  More  rarely,  wood  is  preserved,  but 
there  are  very  few  sites  where  stone,  bone,  and 
wood  all  occur  together.  Only  a very  small  part 
of  the  material  culture  of  a Paleolithic  group 
is  available,  therefore,  as  a basis  of  reconstruc- 
tion of  group  behavior.  However,  when  this  is 
added  to  the  complete  or  partial  floor  patterns, 
it  amounts  to  considerably  more  data  than 
were  generally  available  ten  years  ago. 

As  a result  of  coordinating  work  in  a number 
of  different  disciplines,  it  is  now  possible  to 
reconstruct  with  some  accuracy  the  paleo- 
environment  of  the  occupation  site  and  it  is 
only  once  this  has  been  determined  that  inter- 
pretation of  the  cultural  data  becomes  at  all 
meaningful. 

Obviously,  therefore,  the  living  sites  selected 
for  investigation  need  to  be  very  carefully 
chosen  with  the  reasonably  certain  knowledge 
that  much  of  the  ecological  data  will  be  forth- 
coming and  that  the  occupation  areas  are 
undisturbed  and  in  primary  context.  Such  a 
combination  of  prerequisites  is  not  readily 
come  by,  and  this  indicates  the  necessity  for 
systematic  survey  of  likely  regions  in  the  main 
environments  occupied  by  early  man. 

With  the  best  possible  conditions  of  preserva- 
tion, therefore,  the  prehistorian  starts  with  the 
same  kind  of  evidence  as  is  preserved  on  the 
settlement  sites  of  present-day  hunting  and 
gathering  groups  after  these  have  been  aban- 
doned for  a sufficient  length  of  time  for  the 
more  perishable  remains  to  have  disappeared. 
However,  if  we  can  reconstruct  the  environ- 
ment, we  can  then  build  models  for  the 


278  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 

potential  food  and  other  resources,  vegetable, 
animal,  water,  etc.,  available  to  the  human 
population.  Then,  by  applying  the  adaptive 
data  from  extant  hunter-gatherer  groups  to 
the  specific  archeological  occurrences,  we  can 
attempt  a hypothetical  estimate  or  estimates  of 
behavior,  group  size  and  density. 

So  far  as  Upper  Paleolithic  and  later  sites 
are  concerned,  since  they  represent  the  living 
places  of  Homo  sapiens , we  are  in  a better  posi- 
tion to  interpret  the  behavior  of  the  occupants. 
For  the  various  “paleoanthropoid”  popula- 
tions, however,  meaningful  interpretation  of 
the  cultural  data  is  dependent  also  upon  a 
knowledge  of  the  physical  and  intellectual 
capabilities  of  the  makers,  and  these  are  but 
imperfectly  known. 

These  are  some  of  the  disabilities  under 
which  the  paleoanthropologist  has  to  work. 

For  historic  and  late  prehistoric  sites,  good 
results  can  be  expected  for  interpreting  social 
behavior  if  the  excavated  evidence  can  be 
directly  related  to  oral  tradition  and  to  the 
behavior  of  an  extant  population.  From  this 
it  may  prove  possible  to  establish  for  different 
habitats  a consistency  between  archeological 
patterns  and  behavior.  If  such*  consistency 
exists,  attempts  will  be  made  to  project  this 
back  into  the  more  distant  past.  The  validity 
of  such  extrapolation  for  interpreting  human 
behavior  at  the  Paleolithic  level  will  depend 
on  a demonstration  of  significant  consistency 
in  distribution  and  association  patterns.  At 
the  same  time,  there  must  be  a related  investi- 
gation into  the  various  agencies  responsible  for 
the  distribution  and  disappearance  of  camp- 
site debris.  Probably  the  best  way  to  start  is  by 
studying  the  abandoned  settlements  of  extant 
populations  and  observing  what  happens  to 
these  over  set  periods  of  years.  In  some  regions 
such  as  South-West  Africa,  where  the  habitat 
is  dry  or  semiarid,  reasonably  good  results  can 
be  obtained  since  it  has  been  my  experience 
that  in  such  areas  stone  is  used  for  many  more 
purposes  connected  with  the  construction  of 
the  camp  and  with  hunting  practices  than  is 
the  case  in  tropical  regions  of  higher  rainfall 
where  heavier  timber  is  very  often  used  to  the 
exclusion  of  stone  and  where,  in  a few  years, 
organic  and  inorganic  agents  will  have  re- 
moved practically  every  trace  of  the  settle- 
ment. Generally,  however,  evidence  of  dwel- 


ling floors,  hearth  stones,  enclosure  walling, 
pits,  etc.,  is  preserved  and  if,  moreover,  the 
population  is  still  a stone-using  one,  much 
extremely  valuable  information  must  result 
since  the  existence  of  lithic  material  can  pro- 
vide a direct  basis  for  comparison  with  the 
prehistoric  settlement. 

This  emphasizes  the  urgent  need  for  “ethno- 
archeoiogical”  studies  of  such  extant  “Stone 
Age”  groups  while  they  still  exist.  When  studies 
of  the  Baines  Mountains  OvaTjimba  groups  in 
South-West  Africa  or  of  the  Bindibu  and  other 
groups  in  Australia  are  completed,  they  should 
provide  a wealth  of  new  data  which  can  be 
used  as  a basis  for  establishing  a more  precise 
reconstruction  of  behavior  at  prehistoric  sites. 
There  cannot  be  many  such  groups  surviving, 
but  there  must  still  be  several  in  Australia  and 
South  America,  more  than  one  in  Africa  and, 
perhaps,  in  the  Arctic  also.  Studies  of  peoples 
who  are  known  to  have  used  stone  until  fairly 
recent  times  can  also  be  expected  to  produce 
not  a little  data  regarding  techniques — for 
example,  the  method  of  manufacture  of  bone- 
matting needles  and  arrowheads  by  the 
MaKwango  Bushmen,  or  the  punch  technique 
behind  the  gun-flint  industry  among  the 
Chokwe  and  Lunda  in  northeastern  Angola. 

Where  the  group  studied  is  no  longer  using 
stone,  there  is  so  much  less  permanent  debris 
remaining  on  an  abandoned  site  that  it  may 
be  doubted  how  much  direct  use  the  settlement 
data  are  going  to  be  to  the  prehistorian.  Per- 
sonally, I think  the  fact  that  most  of  the  evi- 
dence disappears  after  a few  years  does  not 
matter  too  greatly  if  we  know  the  basis  of  the 
pattern  while  the  site  is  in  use  and  the  agents 
and  manner  of  dispersal  of  what  remains  after 
the  site  is  abandoned.  The  sharply  defined 
limits  of  the  sleeping  area,  the  spread  and 
limits  of  hearths,  of  the  waste  resulting  from 
special  activities — the  peeling  of  water  lily 
bulbs,  the  cracking  of  mongongo  nuts,  the 
shaping  of  a digging  stick  or  a bow  stave,  for 
example — will  help  to  give  an  approximate 
indication  of  “spread”  of  debris  which  can  be 
compared  with  the  spread  of  factory  waste  and 
tools,  hearths,  sleeping  areas,  etc.,  on  a pre- 
historic living  site  and  with  the  dispersal  of 
debris  by  natural  agencies.  It  is  most  important 
to  have  controlled  data  from  observation  and 
experiment  here. 


Clark  Studies  of  Hunter-Gatherers  as  an  Aid  to  the  Interpretation  of  Prehistoric  Societies 


There  is  a large  number  of  questions  to 
which  the  prehistorian  hopes  for  an  answer 
from  such  studies  as  those  on  the  Kalahari 
Bushmen  by  Lee  and  DeVore,  on  the  Hadza 
by  Woodburn,  or  the  Mbuti  by  Turnbull.  Is 
there  a correlation  between  habitat,  the  di- 
mensions of  the  settlement,  human  activity 
and  season  ? Can  we,  for  example,  distinguish 
dry-season  from  wet-season  camps  ? On  this 
basis  can  one  compute  the  approximate  size  of 
the  occupying  group?  What  alteration  to  the 
habitat  results  from  man’s  presence  at  the  site 
over  different  periods  of  time?  What  is  the  rate 
of  disappearance  of  perishable  occupation  de- 
bris in  different  ecosystems  and  is  it  possible 
to  obtain  any  indication  of  age  of  an  abandoned 
site  from  the  differential  weathering  of  bone 
or  other  materials  ? Does  an  abandoned  occu- 
pation area  consistently  show  an  increase  in 
phosphate  and  calcium  content  of  the  soil?  If 
so,  how  long  does  this  persist?  To  what  extent 
is  artifact  and  food  debris  trodden  or  otherwise 
carried  down  into  the  soil  of  the  occupation 
area?  If  settlements  are  reoccupied,  is  there 
any  discernable  and,  however  slight,  any 
vertical  separation  of  the  artifacts  of  later 
and  earlier  seasons  ? Is  there  any  consistent 
pattern  of  weathering  or  absence  of  weathering 
of  bone,  ivory,  or  wood  that  is  quickly  buried 
or  suffers  long  exposure?  Is  there  a consistent 
pattern  behind  the  different  activity  areas? 
Does  each  family  or  individual  social  unit  work 
within  the  confines  of  its  own  habitation  area, 
or  are  activity  areas  randomly  or  sometimes 
intentionally  selected?  For  example,  is  bone 
waste  regularly  piled  and  are  there  regular 
butchery  places?  What  is  the  rate  of  accumu- 
lation of  debris  that  can  be  expected  at  such 
sites  and  what  is  the  rate  of  dispersal  by 
natural  agents,  man,  and  animals?  What 
activities  are  associated  with  hearths  (stone 
working,  shaft  straightening,  cooking,  sleeping, 
etc.)  and  what  kind  of  disturbance  or  modifica- 
tion of  the  hearth  results?  Significant  hearth 
pattern  differences  must  exist  as  between  the 
cold  temperate  and  subarctic  regions  and  the 
tropics,  so  that  it  is  necessary  to  know  these  and 
also  the  rate  of  dispersal  of  charcoal  on  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  settlement  areas  under  specific 
conditions. 

Some  of  these  queries  have  been  in  part  or 
in  whole  answered  at  this  symposium,  but 


279 

whether  it  is  practicable  to  obtain  answers  to 
others  and  similar  questions  will  depend,  I 
suggest  and  would  particularly  stress  this,  on 
the  cooperation  of  ethnographer  and  archeo- 
logist working  closely  together  in  the  field.  It 
may  be  that  many  of  these  questions  cannot  be 
resolved,  but  until  the  attempt  has  been  made 
we  are  not  in  a position  to  know  one  way  or 
the  other.  In  due  course,  it  should  be  possible 
to  combine  the  special  knowledge  of  ethno- 
grapher and  archeologist  in  a single  individual, 
but  I believe  this  needs  to  be  tackled  as  a 
special  training  project  that  has  yet  to  be 
formulated. 


Technology 

Much  can  also  be  learned  regarding  the  tech- 
nique of  working  different  raw  materials  and 
the  reasons  behind  the  selection  of  some 
materials  to  the  exclusion  of  others.  Especially 
valuable  are  the  data  from  groups  still  using 
stone  tools.  In  these  cases  it  is  possible  to  know 
how  many  tools  are  made  for  a particular 
purpose,  how  many  individuals  cooperate  in 
this,  how  many  of  the  tools  that  are  made  are 
actually  used,  what  the  variation  is  in  shape 
or  form  of  a single  class  of  tool,  and  what  is  the 
intensity  of  use.  Are  the  tools  left  on  the  site  or 
are  they  carried  away?  Are  tools  made  in  one 
year  reused  on  reoccupation  in  another  year? 
What  are  the  methods  of  use  of  different  tools 
— how  are  they  held,  what  muscles  are  used, 
and  where  and  when  is  the  force  applied?  Are 
tools  used  for  more  than  one  purpose  or  in 
more  than  one  way  and,  if  so,  is  this  a regular 
or  an  unusual  practice? 

Such  inquiries  inevitably  lead  on  to  a study 
of  the  wear  patterns  that  result  from  use  of  the 
tools.  Tools  on  prehistoric  sites  in  primary  con- 
text show  fracture  and  damage  that  is  the 
result  of  use.  Although  as  yet  it  is  only  the 
more  obvious  damage  that  has  received  in- 
vestigation, a great  deal  more  is  likely  to  be 
learned  from  systematic  studies  of  edge  damage 
— for  example,  it  should  be  possible  to  isolate 
particular  patterns  of  wear.  Comparison  of 
these  with  the  wear  patterns  on  stone  tools,  or 
even  on  iron  or  bone  tools,  in  an  ethnographic 
context  and  with  the  damage  on  specimens 
resulting  from  controlled  experiment,  should 


280  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


throw  appreciably  more  light  on  the  functional 
nature  of  Paleolithic  tools.  After  the  initial 
disastrous  essays  of  the  late  nineteenth  century, 
archeologists  have  rightly  fought  shy  of  func- 
tional interpretations,  but  the  time  is  now  ripe 
for  new  attempts  to  be  made. 

Historical  Sources 

There  are  many  other  matters  having  a more 
general  bearing  on  the  interpretation  of  the 
behavior  of  prehistoric  hunting  and  gathering 
populations  that  the  new  “ethnoarcheological” 
studies  may  clarify.  Besides  those  having  to  do 
with  the  relationship  of  the  human  group  to 
the  animal  and  vegetable  resources  of  the 
habitat,  both  for  food  and  utilitarian  purposes, 
and  the  degree  to  which  the  human  population 
is  independent  of  the  seasonal  availability  of 
these,  it  would  be  particularly  valuable  to 
know  what  are  the  changes  that  can  be  seen 
in  the  technology  and  the  settlement  pattern 
when  a hunting  and  gathering  group  accepts 
domesticates,  thus  changing  its  economic  basis, 
as  some  of  the  Botswana  Bushman  groups  are 
doing  today.  What  are  the  factors  that  bring 
about  permanent  settlement  at  the  hunting 
and  gathering  level  and  what  is  the  im- 
portance of  freshwater  and  sea  foods  in  this 
connection  ? 

Most  of  the  hunting  and  gathering  groups 
existing  today  are  living  in  some  of  the  least 
favorable  habitats  and  have  for  long  been  in 
contact  with  more  complex  societies  and  tech- 
nologies. They  can,  therefore,  no  longer  be 


considered  “typical”  or  useful  for  any  direct 
comparison  with  prehistoric  populations  of 
optimum  and  favorable,  or  even  of  the  mar- 
ginal, ecological  zones;  yet  a knowledge  of 
their  technology  and  behavior  is  of  general 
significance  for  an  understanding  of  human 
behavior  at  this  economic  level.  Moreover,  it 
should  still  be  possible  to  supplement  the  data 
obtained  from  direct  field  studies  by  searching 
the  historical  sources,  if  these  are  re-examined 
with  the  specific  problems  in  mind  that  such 
studies  are  trying  to  answer.  Much  exists  in 
the  literature  on  Indian  populations  in  the 
New  World,  and  the  same  can  be  said  also  for 
Africa  so  far  as  the  Bush,  Hottentot,  BaTwa, 
and  Pygmy  peoples  are  concerned. 

Coordination  of  the  results  from  fieldwork 
among  hunters  and  gatherers  undertaken  by 
ethnographers  and  archeologists  working  to- 
gether, and  supplemented  also  from  historical 
sources  as  well  as  from  comparative  study  of 
edge-damage  patterns  on  tools,  should  broaden 
considerably  the  basis  for  a more  precise  inter- 
pretation of  the  behavior  of  prehistoric  societies 
as  revealed  by  the  excavation  of  selected  living 
places.  If  and  when  a critical  comparison  of 
these  results,  with  the  archeological  data  from 
undisturbed  living  places  establishes  consis- 
tencies in  patterning  and  grouping  that  are 
common  to  both,  the  framework  for  recon- 
struction will  exist.  The  operation,  as  I see  it, 
is  twofold:  first,  to  obtain  this  “ethnoarcheo- 
logical” data  by  field  work;  second,  to  apply 
it  to  the  archeological  evidence  with  sufficient 
precision  that  a reasonable  measure  of  accuracy 
in  reconstruction  is  ensured. 


Discussions,  Part  VI 


31a.  Hunters  in 
Archeological  Perspective 

Speaker:  Deetz 

Deetz  : This  statement  probably  represents 
a viewpoint  somewhat  different  from  those  of 
the  other  participants  in  this  symposium,  since 
I am  neither  a Paleolithic  archeologist  nor  have 
I had  field  experience  among  living  hunting 
peoples.  I suppose  there  are  few  subjects  within 
anthropology  as  far  removed  from  the  study  of 
hunting  and  gathering  peoples  as  European 
Colonial  North  America,  the  area  in  which  my 
major  research  interests  lie.  Yet  as  an  archeo- 
logist, I feel  that  there  are  certain  things  which 
I might  profitably  say  that  are  germane  to  the 
subject  simply  because  they  are  based  on 
archeological  and  ethnological  theory  in 
general,  as  well  as  being  concerned  with  hun- 
ters in  particular.  Many  of  the  remarks  which 
follow  should  be  taken  as  attempts  to  tighten 
up  our  view  of  hunting  peoples;  they  are  not 
meant  to  be  as  critical  as  they  might  seem.  In 
many  instances  the  position  taken  is  that  of 
devil’s  advocate. 

The  topic  of  the  symposium — Man  the 
Hunter — suggests  that  there  is  a utility  in  the 
concept  of  hunting  man  as  opposed  to  man 
involved  in  other  activities.  While  I am  certain 
that  all  of  us  use  the  idea  of  hunters  and 
gatherers  to  signify  a certain  cultural  level, 


both  in  archeology  and  ethnology,  I am  equally 
certain  that  none  of  us  would  deny  that  group- 
ing hunting  peoples  under  one  head  creates 
some  strange  bedfellows.  If  hunting  and  gather- 
ing is  taken  to  indicate  the  total  absence  of  any 
type  of  productive  economy,  then  we  can  in- 
clude Kwakiutl,  Asmat,  Eskimo,  Chumash, 
and  even  Arapaho  under  one  heading;  cer- 
tainly these  five  examples  exhibit  a great 
variety  of  cultural  types  and  share  in  few 
characteristics  other  than  a common  economic 
base.  The  grouping  excludes  the  Wampanoag, 
who  even  fertilized  their  corn  but  whose  social 
organization  is  similar  to  most  northeastern 
hunting  peoples;  the  Ge,  who  cultivate,  but 
who  are  more  than  casually  similar  to  the 
Australians  in  many  aspects  of  their  society; 
the  Siriono,  who  are  admittedly  a refugee 
group  and  not  exactly  typical  of  anything;  and 
most  of  the  peoples  of  the  Chaco,  who  cultivate, 
but  place  great  emphasis  on  hunting  and 
gathering,  and  share  many  aspects  of  social  and 
ritual  culture  with  those  groups  usually  thought 
of  as  hunters. 

Since  hunting,  even  among  those  peoples 
who  we  normally  think  of  as  hunters,  is  per- 
haps of  less  importance  than  was  earlier 
thought  (see  Lee’s  remarks,  Chapter  4,  this 
volume)  it  really  becomes  reduced  to  the  status 
of  a single  occupational  activity,  such  as 
gathering,  pottery  making,  or  house  construc- 
tion. It  might  then  be  equally  profitable  to 


282  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


consider  Man  the  Gatherer  or  Man  the  Potter, 
and  in  the  latter  case,  grouping  those  cultures 
which  possess  ceramics  just  possibly  might 
produce  sets  with  more  culture  traits  in  com- 
mon. Of  course,  this  is  an  over-literal  inter- 
pretation of  the  title  of  the  symposium,  since 
hunting  is  taken  as  a convenient  label  to  attach 
to  a group  of  cultures  which  do  share  in  many 
things,  as  can  be  seen  from  looking  at  the 
program  and  reading  the  titles  of  the  various 
papers.  However,  I think  if  we  reduce  this  to 
a semi-absurdity  such  as  that  above,  a purpose 
is  served  in  that  we  do  not  tend  to  let  the  label 
over  describe  the  subject.  The  numerous  sug- 
gestions for  alternate  terms  for  hunters,  such 
as  foragers,  indicate  this  concern  among  many 
of  us  for  a more  descriptive  category. 

The  symposium  is  divided  into  a number  of 
sessions  devoted  to  specific  problems;  I will 
comment  on  these  from  a perspective  which  is 
largely  archeological,  though  not  entirely  so. 

The  Subsistence  Base 

Determination  of  the  basis  of  subsistence  from 
archeological  material  is  perhaps  the  most 
satisfying  of  all  of  the  aspects  of  society  under 
consideration  here.  In  this  case,  we  can  exca- 
vate the  remains  of  food,  as  well  as  the  tools 
used  to  obtain  it,  and  make  quite  specific  and 
quantitative  statements  about  who  was  eating 
what,  and  when. 

As  a word  of  caution,  however,  it  has  oc- 
curred to  me,  as  it  probably  has  to  many  others, 
that  there  is  a peculiar  difference  between  the 
evidence  of  hunting  and  the  evidence  of  gather- 
ing in  terms  of  what  is  preserved.  Bone  and 
stone  are  the  normal  materials  which  survive 
from  the  Paleolithic.  These  materials  also  form 
the  bulk  of  the  evidence  of  game  pursuit  at  that 
time ; combined  with  the  cave  paintings  of  the 
Upper  Paleolithic  they  give  us  a clear  picture 
of  hunting  activities  and  technology. 

If  ethnographic  example  is  in  any  way  trust- 
worthy, and  in  this  case  I think  it  is,  the  tools 
used  in  gathering,  and  the  plant  foods  gathered, 
are  quite  perishable,  and  except  for  rare  cases 
of  carbonization  or  excellent  preservation  of 
organic  substances,  would  not  be  present  in 
midden  deposits  of  the  period.  In  view  of 
recently  gained  understandings  of  the  ratio 


between  hunting  and  gathering  in  the  subsis- 
tence base  of  living  hunters,  might  we  be  over- 
emphasizing the  role  of  hunting  during  the 
Paleolithic?  Perhaps  not,  but  the  caution 
voiced  here  may  be  in  order.  It  can  be  argued 
that  the  cave  paintings  of  the  Upper  Paleo- 
lithic show  a great  concern  for  animals,  and 
suggest  in  some  way  a high  interest  in  the 
hunt.  But  if  I were  faced  with  the  choice  be- 
tween drawing  a stag  or  a mammoth  on  the 
one  hand,  and  a seed  or  a root  on  the  other,  I 
am  certain  what  decision  I would  make — a 
subjective,  ethnocentric  remark  to  be  sure,  but 
perhaps  relevant. 

The  Social  Unit 

Until  lately,  statements  regarding  the  specific 
nature  of  prehistoric  social  units  were  almost 
impossible  to  formulate.  There  has  been  recent 
interest  in  social  reconstruction  which  has  re- 
sulted in  our  ability,  or  at  least  potential,  to 
make  such  specific  statements  about  certain 
aspects  of  prehistoric  social  organization  in  a 
way  not  available  earlier.  The  symposium  at 
the  national  meeting  of  the  American  Anthro- 
pological Association  in  Denver,  which  ad- 
dressed itself  to  problems  of  social  organization 
in  the  past,  focused  attention  on  these  innova- 
tions in  archeological  method. 

In  a Paleolithic  context,  where  the  most 
pressing  and  important  problems  concerning 
the  social  organization  of  hunters  probably 
exist,  these  new  methods  hold  promise  of  de- 
veloping models  of  the  sort  discussed  by  Lewis 
Binford  to  detail  the  structure  of  Paleolithic 
societies.  The  caution  which  I would  suggest 
in  this  case  is  that  of  making  certain  that  we 
have  very  precise  chronological  control  before 
making  too  many  statements  about  patterning 
in  assemblages  as  it  reflects  social  patterning  in 
a synchronic  way.  As  Roger  Owen  suggested 
to  me  in  a conversation  last  fall,  it  would  be 
most  desirable  to  know  that  the  assemblages 
which  we  were  comparing  were  within  25 
years  of  each  other  in  time,  since  this  period 
represents  roughly  one  generation.  If  hunting 
populations  were  as  fluid  in  the  past  in  terms 
of  membership  and  sharing  of  ideas,  and  the 
limits  of  such  sharing,  more  than  one  genera- 
tion could  well  introduce  differences  which 


might  be  seen  as  a function  of  synchronic 
variation  but  which  are  in  reality  a matter  of 
chronological  separation.  Now  I don’t  think 
we  can  ever  get  25-year  accuracy  with  regu- 
larity, if  at  all,  in  the  Paleolithic,  but  we  must 
be  careful  that  we  do  not  compare  assemblages 
which  might  in  fact  be  hundreds  or  thousands 
of  years  apart  in  time. 

I heartily  agree  with  Binford’s  emphasis  on 
viewing  prehistoric  cultures  as  integrated  sys- 
tems, but  such  integration  automatically  as- 
sumes a large  measure  of  contemporaneity. 
Perhaps  there  are  already  at  our  disposal 
means  of  determining  that  a single  Paleolithic 
stratum,  for  example,  represents  a short  inter- 
val of  time,  or  at  least  that  there  is  some  de- 
positional  unit  which  can  be  seen  in  such  a 
way.  I honestly  don’t  know,  but  from  what  we 
know  about  trash-deposition  rates  based  on 
studies  such  as  Lee’s  and  DeVore’s  of  the  Bush- 
men, it  takes  time  for  material  to  accumulate. 
Of  course,  caves  have  a certain  built-in  “trash 
container”  function  which  does  not  prevail  in 
open-air  situations. 

In  this  connection,  I would  suggest  that 
features,  especially  structures,  with  their  as- 
sociated artifacts  are  considerably  more  depen- 
dable in  assuring  the  archeologist  of  contem- 
poraneity than  stratified  middens.  Deflation, 
for  example,  can  combine  separate  midden 
deposits  into  a rather  homogeneous  whole. 
Structures,  on  the  other  hand,  such  as  the 
spectacular  houses  at  Kostienki  and  other  south 
Russian  Paleolithic  sites  (Klein,  1965a,  1965b), 
are  behaviorial  units  with  a set  of  contemporary 
objects  within.  Thus  in  inspecting  the  contents 
of  a single  structure,  we  can  be  fairly  confident 
that  the  associated  assemblage  was  all  in  use 
at  one  time,  if  not  made  at  the  same  time. 

In  any  case,  all  inferences  drawn  regarding 
social  units  in  the  Paleolithic  which  are  based 
on  comparing  patterns  from  assemblage  to 
assemblage  must  ultimately  rest  on  the  con- 
temporary nature  of  these  assemblages  for  their 
accuracy.  I do  not  mean  that  such  an  approach 
is  not  advisable;  quite  to  the  contrary,  this 
method  promises  exciting  advances  in  the 
direction  of  sharpening  our  understanding  of 
social  organization  in  the  Paleolithic.  I am 
only  concerned  that  we  are  as  careful  to  control 
the  dimension  of  time  as  we  are  in  our  control 
of  form  and  space. 


Discussions,  Part  VI  283 

The  problem  addressed  in  a part  of  the  Bin- 
fords’  statements  (Chapters  28  and  29),  that 
of  the  validity  of  using  ethnographic  data  to 
assist  us  in  our  reconstruction  of  earlier  hunters’ 
social  units,  is  a genuine  one,  and  they  have 
made  explicit  some  of  the  ramifications  and 
possible  pitfalls  involved.  I would  like  to  call 
attention  to  another  aspect  of  this  same  prob- 
lem which  might  have  implications  that  go 
beyond  those  involved  in  archeological  recon- 
struction. Even  if  we  were  to  agree  that  there 
was  great  value  in  using  the  Bushman,  Eskimo, 
or  Pygmy  as  typical  hunters,  and  possible  sur- 
vivors from  an  earlier  time,  we  must  ask  how 
typical  these  people  actually  are  of  the  type  of 
life  which  existed  before  the  initial  years  of  the 
Neolithic  revolution.  To  put  it  another  way, 
of  the  hunting  peoples  in  existence  today, 
which  might  be  thought  of  as  most  typical  of 
pre-Neolithic  society? 

I think  that  there  is  a possibility  that  the 
closest  approach  to  Paleolithic  social  units 
which  exist  in  the  ethnographic  present  is  to  be 
seen  in  the  Australians,  the  Ge,  and  to  a some- 
what lesser  extent,  aboriginal  Californians.  This 
rather  strange  selection  is  based  on  certain  logi- 
cal considerations.  If  we  consider  the  hunting 
peoples  of  the  world  in  the  time  immediately 
before  widespread  European  influence  (six- 
teenth through  nineteenth  centuries),  there  are 
three  areas  in  the  world  which  were  almost 
absolutely  immune  from  influence  and  pressure 
from  cultures  based  on  a productive  economy 
— areas  where  hunters  had  lived  for  millenia 
in  a stable  relationship  to  their  environment. 
These  areas — California,  eastern  Brazil,  and 
Australia — are  the  largest  such  continuous 
regions  where  the  influence  of  the  Neolithic  or 
formative  simply  did  not  penetrate.  I can  not 
think  of  any  other  comparable  area  which  has 
had  such  long  isolation,  with  the  possible 
exception  of  the  Arctic.  The  Eskimos  are  a 
rather  specialized  case  in  many  ways,  how- 
ever, and  in  any  event,  are  relative  newcomers 
to  their  area. 

All  other  hunting  peoples  of  which  we  have 
ethnographic  knowledge  were  subject  in  some 
way  or  another  to  influences  from  developing 
Neolithic  peoples  from  as  early  as  the  eighth 
millenium  b.c.  in  many  cases.  The  Bushmen, 
for  example,  were  under  the  direct  influence 
of  other  Africans  prior  to  the  arrival  of 


284  Prehistoric  Hunter -Gatherers 


Europeans,  and  the  marginal  and  encysted 
nature  of  the  other  enclaves  of  hunters  around 
the  world  probably  came  into  being  prior  to 
their  contact  with  European  culture.  It  is  only 
in  the  three  areas  mentioned  above  that  we  can 
confidently  postulate  long-term  undisturbed 
development  of  hunting  peoples,  free  of  any 
disruptions  from  without.  The  Californians 
were  cut  off  by  the  Basin  and  deserts;  their 
nearest  farming  neighbors  were  encysted  them- 
selves. The  Ge  seem  to  have  been  quite  free 
from  major  influence  from  tropical  forest 
farmers  to  the  north ; while  manioc  is  cultivated 
by  some  of  the  Ge  groups,  the  main  cultivated 
crops  include  maize,  beans,  and  squash,  a very 
different  complex  from  that  found  among  their 
nearest  neighbors.  Furthermore,  Ge  mythology 
includes  origin  myths  for  these  latter  three 
plants,  but  none  for  manioc.  The  additional 
cultivation  of  Cissus  by  these  people,  unique 
in  the  world,  points  to  their  long  isolation,  and 
independent  activity  in  matters  pertaining  to 
cultivation.  The  Australians  of  course,  have 
been  isolated  since  the  end  of  the  Pleistocene. 

There  are  certain  similarities  seen  in  all 
three  of  these  groups  in  the  form  of  their  social 
units  which  seem  to  be  more  than  coincidental. 
Most  striking  is  the  existence  and  strong  de- 
velopment of  moiety  organization  in  all  three 
cases.  The  correspondence  of  this  feature  in 
Ge  and  Australian  culture  has  often  been 
commented  on,  and  moiety  development  is 
marked  among  many  California  Indian  groups. 
It  is  assumed  that  moieties  serve  the  purpose 
of  providing  the  individual  with  a clearly  de- 
fined sense  of  social  orientation  wherever  he 
might  find  himself  over  a broad  geographic 
area.  Thus  in  the  case  of  thinly  distributed 
populations,  and  small  social  groups,  a person 
can  immediately  align  himself  with  this  or  that 
social  unit  even  when  he  enters  a strange 
community  for  the  first  time.  Moieties  are  also 
found  in  more  complex  cultures,  but  their 
function  is  somewhat  different  in  these  cases. 
But  the  only  instances  of  strong  development 
of  moieties  among  hunting  peoples  that  I have 
been  able  to  discover  are  the  Ge,  Australian, 
and  Californian  cases. 

Is  this  a coincidence?  Could  it  be  that  these 
three  large  isolates  have  retained  a form  of 
social  organization  which  was  much  more 
widely  distributed  before  the  Neolithic?  Hunt- 


ing populations  living  in  the  same  environ- 
ment for  millenia  might  be  expected  to  evolve 
such  a structure,  given  a large  amount  of 
stability,  with  no  outside  influence,  since  it 
serves  a valuable  social  integrative  purpose 
among  thinly  distributed  populations.  All  other 
hunting  groups,  having  been  more  or  less 
moved  about  and  influenced  by  expanding 
Neolithic  culture,  might  not  have  been  able 
to  retain  such  a complex  structure.  In  one 
sense,  such  an  organization  is  a spatial  pheno- 
menon and  depends  on  a rather  formal  and 
fixed  spatial  relationship  between  the  people 
and  the  environment.  Should  frequent  move- 
ment become  common,  with  some  environ- 
mental change,  such  a delicate  and  complex 
institution  might  be  expected  to  weaken  and 
disappear. 

If  the  Ge,  Australians,  and  Californians  are 
indeed  more  typical  of  pre-Neolithic  social 
structures  than  those  groups  which  we  con- 
ventionally think  of  as  hunters,  with  some 
form  of  “patrilocal  band”  organization,  or  some 
similar  type,  then  we  might  consider  shifting 
our  concept  of  a modal  hunting  culture  away 
from  the  Bushmen,  Pygmy,  and  Eskimo  and 
in  the  direction  of  these  somewhat  more  com- 
plex societies.  While  Service  suggests  that  the 
composite  and  family-band  types  defined  by 
Steward  are  the  result  of  pressures  brought  to 
bear  by  Europeans,  perhaps  the  patrilocal 
band  is  also  such  a contact  phenomenon,  al- 
though the  superior  cultures  would  be  different 
in  this  case.  If  this  is  so,  most  of  the  hunting 
peoples  of  the  world  are  very  little  like  those 
of  the  Paleolithic,  and  only  a very  few  of  them 
retain  even  a vestige  of  what  may  have  been  a 
very  complex  social  form  in  the  time  before  the 
Neolithic. 


Population  Reconstruction 

The  determination  of  population  density  from 
archeological  data  is  less  precise  than  the  re- 
construction of  at  least  a portion  of  prehistoric 
subsistence  bases  of  early  hunters,  but  is  still  a 
relatively  productive  and  valuable  approach 
to  understanding  these  cultures.  This  is  parti- 
cularly so  when  one  has  available  archeological 
information  concerning  houses,  and  some  idea 
of  household  sizes  within  a community.  In 


many  ways,  some  of  the  most  stimulating  re- 
sults, to  me  at  least,  of  the  recent  work  by  Lee 
and  DeVore  among  the  Bushman  are  those 
which  indicate  just  how  many  people  are 
needed  to  create  a recognizable  archeological 
unit.  In  this  case,  it  would  seem  to  be  more 
people  than  the  average  Bushman  band  con- 
tains. 

I was  talking  to  Richard  Lee  about  the 
problem  of  “archeological  visibility” — that  is, 
how  much  activity  is  needed  to  produce  a site 
which  could  be  found  a long  time  later.  We 
decided  that  there  might  be  a value  in  talking 
about  some  kind  of  a threshold  value  which 
would  represent  the  amount  and  type  of 
activity  needed  to  produce  a visible  pattern 
on  and  ultimately  in  the  ground.  It  seemed 
that  two  factors  are  involved  at  least.  In  the 
first  place,  a quite  large  community  would 
make  less  of  an  imprint  on  the  archeological 
record  if  it  were  more  mobile  than  a smaller 
population  which  maintained  occupancy  of 
one  location  over  a longer  period,  or  reused  it 
periodically.  The  second  factor  is  absolute 
community  size,  and  the  two  combine  to 
create  an  archeological  impression  which  is 
either  above  or  below  this  threshold.  I'he 
threshold  would  then  represent  that  combina- 
tion of  community  size  and  use  of  a given  locus 
of  sufficient  intensity  to  yield  a recognizable 
effect  on  the  locus  after  final  abandonment. 
The  Bushmen  seem  well  below  this  threshold, 
and  many  other  hunters  are  probably  below  it 
as  well.  If  in  our  studies  of  known  hunters  in 
the  ethnographic  present  we  were  to  consider 
how  they  relate  to  this  threshold  value,  we 
might  be  able  to  come  up  with  some  statement 
of  minimal  “archeological  visibility,”  which 
could  then  be  used  with  advantage  in  our 
archeological  interpretation.  The  Californians 
are  certainly  very  visible,  as  are  the  Upper 
Paleolithic  inhabitants  of  much  of  Europe.  Less 
visible,  except  at  their  kill  sites,  are  the  pedes- 
trian hunters  of  the  Plains  prior  to  the  coming 
of  the  Europeans  with  their  horses,  or  the 
Shoshonean  peoples  of  the  Great  Basin.  Pre- 
sumably these  groups  are  well  above  the  thres- 
hold, and  the  Bushmen  are  below. 

I am  concerned  about  those  peoples  in  the 
past  who  are  invisible  in  this  sense,  and  whether 
many  modern  hunters  are  more  like  them,  or 
closer  to  those  cultures  who  left  their  imprint 


Discussions,  Part  VI  285 

on  the  landscape  in  a wide  and  deep  way.  If 
they  are,  then  those  cultures  which  have  been 
“invisible”  through  time  could  well  have  been 
extremely  similar  to  their  modern  counterparts, 
but  aligning  many  modern  hunters  with  archeo- 
logically  visible  groups  is  in  part  a potential 
error  which  could  have  serious  effects.  The 
often  asked  question,  “Are  the  Bushmen  typi- 
cal of  culture  in  the  past?”  would  then  be 
answered  in  the  affirmative,  but  with  the 
qualification  that  we  cannot  determine  how 
these  earlier  cultures  functioned  from  the 
archeological  record,  since  they  would  be  below 
the  “visibility  threshold.”  The  Bushmen  thus 
would  be  typical  of  some  past  cultures,  but  not 
those  which  we  are  able  to  excavate  and  study. 
If  the  above  remarks  concerning  the  Ge  and 
similar  cultures  have  any  merit  whatsoever, 
perhaps  there  are  remnants  of  archeologically 
visible  cultures  with  us  today,  but  they  are  few 
in  number. 

There  is  yet  another  factor  contributing  to 
the  degree  of  utility  which  any  archeological 
configuration  might  possess  for  inferential 
purposes.  This  factor  might  be  termed  “sharp- 
ness” or  focus;  that  is,  how  distinct  is  the 
pattern  which  is  visible?  A very  visible  assem- 
bly might  not  be  too  sharp  in  the  patterning 
which  it  exhibits,  while  a much  less  visible  unit 
might  be  very  clear  in  its  patterning.  At  least 
two  factors  would  seem  to  affect  the  sharpness 
in  focus  of  an  assemblage. 

Groups  of  the  kind  we  have  heard  discussed 
at  this  session,  characterized  by  very  fluid, 
changing  behavioral  patterns,  might  be  ex- 
pected to  produce  more  diffuse  patterns  in 
their  assemblages  than  highly  structured 
societies  in  theirs. 


31b.  Archeological 
Visibility  of  Food-Gatherers 

Speakers : L.  Binford,  Clark,  Deevey,  Owen,  Pilling, 
Sackelt,  Slruever,  Suttles,  Washburn 

Washburn:  I have  two  brief  points  on  the 
matter  of  visibility  in  respect  to  the  tremendous 
problems  of  reconstructing  the  vegetative  com- 
ponents of  an  archeological  site.  I think  it  is 
frequently  forgotten  that  animal  bones  found 
at  a site  often  give  us  some  rough  notion  about 


286  Prehistoric  Hunter-Gatherers 


the  plants  on  which  the  animals  fed.  The  other 
point,  one  that  Robert  Heizer  has  made,  is 
that  the  trace  elements  in  the  site  are  altered 
by  the  particular  kinds  of  plants  that  grew 
there.  It  can  be  proved,  for  example,  that 
there  was  corn  at  a certain  site,  even  though 
there  are  no  actual  plant  remains  whatsoever. 
So  I do  not  think  that  we  should  think  of 
visibility  in  an  archeological  context  simply  in 
the  usual  sense  of  the  word. 

Struever:  There  are  other  recovery  tech- 
niques, such  as  flotation  techniques,  that 
archeologists  do  not  yet  use.  By  such  tech- 
niques, one  can  recover  a remarkable  quantity 
of  plant  remains  invisible  to  the  eye,  even 
though  they  are  macroplant  remains.  These 
techniques  could  be  used  to  extend  the  record 
a lot  further. 

Pilling:  I might  also  stress  the  importance 
of  minute  fragments  of  charcoal,  which  nor- 
mally allow  species  identification.  Also,  we 
have  some  pretty  tricky  ecological  questions  to 
settle  for  many  grassland  areas  of  the  world. 
If  a prehistoric  culture  participated  in  fire 
drives  for  game,  I think  this  will  have  a signi- 
ficant effect  on  the  floral  remains.  1'he  remains 
may  last  until  the  present  time  in  what  we 
would  interpret  to  be  a fairly  good  representa- 
tion of  prehistoric  floral  remains,  and  yet  not 
be  an  accurate  representation  of  this  at  all. 

Clark:  I would  like  to  join  the  others  in 
emphasizing  the  importance  of  studying  vege- 
table foods  in  the  prehistoric  context.  As  Jim 
Deetz  has  said,  archeologists  have  grossly 
underestimated  their  importance  up  to  now, 
mainly  because  the  data  are  not  a part  of  the 
typed  series  of  artifacts  that  they  have  ana- 
lyzed— or,  rather,  they  have  felt  that  the  data 
were  not  there.  There  are  certain  sites  that 
clearly  produce  this  evidence,  such  as  water- 
logged sites,  which  are  well  known  in  New 
Zealand  and  in  Mesolithic  and  Paleolithic 
sites  in  Europe.  At  another  such  site,  Kalambo 
Falls,  we  have  actual  seeds  and  nuts  of  about 
half  a dozen  species,  which  tell  us  (besides  the 
fact  that  they  were  collected)  the  time  of  year 
at  which  the  site  was  occupied.  Also,  there  are 
certain  short  sticks,  pointed  at  both  ends;  and 
I would  be  interested  to  know  from  ethno- 
graphers whether  anything  of  this  kind  is  used 
for  digging  up  vegetable  materials. 

One  of  the  main  pieces  of  evidence  that 


occur  on  these  sites  with  shaped  artifacts  are 
rough  blocks  and  chunks  of  stone.  These  must 
be  looked  at  very  carefully  and  compared  with 
ethnographic  evidence.  James  Woodburn  col- 
lected a hammer  used  for  breaking  bones 
among  the  Hadza.  Now  this  is  a perfectly  or- 
dinary chunk  which  has  nothing  more  revealing 
on  it  than  a few  bash  marks  and  blunted  edges. 
So  I would  like  to  know  from  ethnographers 
what,  in  addition  to  shaped  tools,  is  used  for 
breaking  up  and  preparing  vegetable  foods. 

Finally,  something  further  to  Dr.  Pilling’s 
remarks  about  minute  pieces  of  charcoal : there 
is  a danger  in  dealing  with  them.  These  occur 
in  certain  of  the  mushitu,  relict  forest  patches  in 
central  Africa,  and  it  was  thought  that  they 
might  well  give  an  indication  of  the  age  of  the 
original,  unburned  forest  patches.  But  the  evi- 
dence suggests  that  burrowing  animals  have 
almost  certainly  complicated  the  matter  of 
interpretation.  So  one  must  be  careful  in 
dealing  with  microscopic  particles. 

Deevey:  In  view  of  the  high  probability 
that  pebble  tools  of  Paleolithic  age  were  almost 
invariably  used  for  chopping  up  plant  food, 
and  in  view  of  the  ease  with  which  gas  chroma- 
tography extracts  microgram  and  millimicro- 
gram  quantities  of  hydrocarbons  from  meteo- 
rites, I would  strongly  recommend  that  archeo- 
logists stop  washing  and  handling  the  pebble 
tools  that  they  find. 

Suttles:  If  I may  return  to  that  anomalous 
area,  the  Northwest  coast,  I might  say  that 
among  the  Salish  the  pattern  for  exploiting 
the  habitat  consisted  in  their  going  to  favorite 
places  at  particular  times  of  the  year.  For 
example,  at  the  lowest  tides  in  June  people 
came  from  several  villages  to  a favorite  clam 
bed,  dug  clams  in  great  quantities,  steamed 
and  dryed  them,  and  took  them  back — leaving 
the  shells  behind.  To  the  archeologist,  this 
might  look  like  long  occupation  by  a small 
group  or,  perhaps,  seasonal  occupation  by  a 
much  larger  group  than,  in  fact,  was  involved. 
To  cite  another  example,  a professional  hunter 
might  go  into  the  hills,  spend  the  summer 
hunting  and  process  the  kills  at  a campsite, 
taking  the  dried  meat  back  and  leaving  the 
bones.  An  archeologist  digging  into  such  a site 
might  not  even  recognize  it  as  belonging  to  the 
same  culture  that  had  left  the  pile  of  shells  on 
the  beach. 


Binford:  This  very  thing  has  occurred. 
There  are  cases  that  could  be  documented  for 
eastern  North  America,  where  “cultural  units” 
have  been  defined  for  sites  that  actually  repre- 
sent either  seasonal  or  task-specific  occupation. 

I refer  particularly  to  some  of  the  sites  along 
the  Tennessee  River.  However,  if  one  follows 
an  operational  procedure  based  on  theoretical 
considerations  of  the  type  outlined  by  Free- 
man, one’s  first  concern  is  to  account  for  the 
observed  variations  within  a region.  This  at 
least  gives  us  a chance  of  seeing  the  shell  heap 
and  the  isolated  campsite  as  task-specific  sites 
within  a variable  region,  rather  than  as  neces- 
sarily separate  basic  units.  Hopefully,  by  antici- 
pating such  variability,  we  may  be  able  to 
develop  means  of  testing  alternative  hypotheses 
and  coming  out  with  an  approximation  of  the 
adaptive  system  present  in  the  region. 

i Owen:  I wonder  whether  someone  would 
elaborate  on  the  techniques  that  make  it  pos- 
sible to  tell  whether  a living  floor  was  occupied 
for  a short  or  a long  period  of  time. 

Clark:  This  sort  of  thing  is  a problem  for 
the  geologists  as  well  as  for  archeologists,  but 
in  any  particular  case  it  will  be  clear  whether 
a horizon  has  been  exposed  for  a long  time  or 
not.  If  it  has  been  exposed  for  a long  time 
there  will  be  erosion,  formation  of  soils,  dif- 
ferential wearing  of  the  artifacts,  artifacts  of 
different  ages  associated,  natural  accumula- 
tions of  rubble,  and  other  such  signs. 

Sackett:  You  can  also  tell  a great  deal 
from  maturation  evidence  in  bones.  For 
example,  in  the  Upper  Paleolithic  of  France 
you  find  reindeer  teeth  and  antlers  showing 
every  stage  of  growth,  and  you  know  that  you 
are  dealing  with  year-round  occupation.  Like- 
wise, bone  material  that  indicates  year-round 
occupation  is  usually  found  in  association  with 
strictly  local  raw  materials;  while  evidence  of 
periodicity  in  animal  bones  is  often  associated 
with  exotic  raw  materials. 


3 ic.  The  Use  of 
Ethnography  in 
Reconstructing  the  Past 

Speakers:  Clark,  DeVore,  Howell,  Sharp,  Turnbull 

Howell:  I want  to  direct  the  attention  of 


Discussions,  Part  VI  287 

anthropologists  concerned  with  existing  hun- 
ter-gatherers to  some  of  the  situations  and 
problems  that  confront  the  paleoanthropolo- 
gist  concerned  with  Quaternary  hominids. 
Until  this  afternoon,  there  has  been  little  said 
about  cultural  evolution  beyond  an  occasional 
mention  of  how  unsatisfactory  are  precontact 
cultural  reconstructions  for  some  of  the  groups 
discussed. 

Paleoanthropologists  seem  to  fall  into  two 
camps  I hesitate  to  say  “bands”  or  “hordes”  : 
(1)  those  who  feel  that  intensive  study  and 
deep  understanding  of  the  present  may  offer 
guidelines  or  even  solutions  to  problematic 
situations  of  the  distant  past,  and  (2)  those, 
less  so  inclined,  who  are  ever  hopeful  that  new 
methods,  procedures,  and  formulations  will  be 
developed  which  might  provide  insights  into 
the  adaptation  and  behavior  of  hominid  popu- 
lations, often  long  extinct  and  biologically,  at 
least  in  part,  quite  unlike  ourselves.  I stand 
among  the  latter,  and  I trust  that  after  the 
discussions  of  the  past  few  days,  our  numbers 
may  increase  markedly.  To  list  a number  of 
the  points  on  which  we  have  heard  new  and/or 
conflicting  data  here—  all  of  them  used  more 
or  less  unquestioningly  by  some  paleoanthro- 
pologists— I might  mention:  the  importance 
to  be  assigned  to  scavenged  meat;  the  extent 
and  significance  of  game  procurement  among 
so-called  “hunters” ; the  importance  of  vege- 
table food  sources;  the  permeability  of  a well- 
delineated  “territory”;  the  fluid  size  and  semi- 
structured  character  of  human  groups;  the 
frequency  of  bilaterality;  the  variability  of 
and  exceptions  to  fixed-cousin  marriage  rules; 
the  frequent  and  perhaps  universal  lack  of 
immediate  environmental  determinism  of 
group  size,  spacing,  or  mobility;  the  diversity 
and  significance  of  subcommunity  units, 
whether  dyads,  subfactions,  etc.;  and  the  low 
degree  of  predator-determined  mortality.  The 
paleoanthropologist  who  is  still  set  on  recon- 
structing the  past  on  the  basis  of  existing 
hunter-gatherer  evidence  has,  obviously,  an 
unusually  wide  range  of  choices  from  which  to 
draw  analogies  about  social  structure  and 
human  behavior.  Therefore,  I suggest  that 
reconstruction  efforts  of  this  sort  be  discouraged 
or  very  severely  curtailed  except  for  very  recent 
time  periods. 

In  secondary  sources  and  in  many  texts 


288  Prehistoric  Hunter -Gatherers 


relating  to  early  man,  there  is  a lot  of  genera- 
lization about  stages  in  the  Pleistocene.  I think, 
however,  that  we  may  safely  disregard  every- 
thing that  has  been  said  about  Pleistocene 
stages,  because  all  the  new  evidence  provides 
exceptions  to  the  existing  generalizations. 
Many  sites  show  a great  diversity  in  local 
ecological  and  regional  settings.  All  that  one 
can  now  say  about  the  earlier  range  of  Pleisto- 
cene times  is  that  the  sites  are  immensely  di- 
versified; there  is  no  single  pattern.  They  are 
not  always  related  to  water  or  to  open  areas. 
About  all  that  we  can  say  is  that,  so  far  as  we 
know,  there  were  no  sites  in  specifically  tropical 
evergreen  forests,  although  some  were  very 
close  to  these  areas. 

Most  of  the  sites  have  been  characterized  in 
terms  of  industries — Acheulian,  Oldowan,  and 
so  on.  These  terms  have  generally  originated 
from  the  fossiles  directeurs  concept  mentioned 
by  Sackett.  We  now  have  a lot  of  data  for  a 
long  period  of  time  to  show  the  variety,  di- 
versity, and  frequency  of  occurrence  of  tool 
kits  or  debris,  or  both  in  combination.  It  turns 
out  that  most  of  the  fossiles  directeurs  for,  say, 
the  Acheulian  or  Oldowan  are  among  the 
objects  least  frequently  found  in  occurrences  in 
which  there  is  a scatter  pattern.  So  in  the  very 
near  future  we  shall  have  to  revise  our  termi- 
nology completely. 

Much  has  been  written  about  early  man  in 
the  Pleistocene  as  a hunter  or  hunter-gatherer. 
The  more  we  learn  about  early  occupation 
sites  within  the  500,000-2,000,000-year  time 
range,  the  more  diverse  the  “hunting”  be- 
havior appears  to  be.  The  early  material  in 
Bed  I at  Olduvai  was  originally  said  to  repre- 
sent the  remains  of  small,  slow-moving,  and 
easily  captured  game;  as  more  of  the  sites  are 
exposed,  this  no  longer  appears  to  be  the  case. 
At  Vertesszollos  it  was  also  thought  that  the 
fauna  associated  with  Oldowan-like  artifacts 
was  small,  which  is  true  of  the  south  end  of 
the  site.  But  at  the  north  end,  they  have  re- 
cently found  four  new  occurrences — all  bears! 

Isaac  (Chapter  26,  this  volume)  has  talked 
a bit  about  the  size  of  sites,  and  I might  add  a 
few  more  comments  and  examples.  Some  are 
very  large.  We  have  one  in  Spain,  partially 
preserved,  of  over  4,000  square  meters;  and  it 
continues,  with  interruption,  into  another  area. 
The  mystic  figure  of  25  persons,  which  has  been 


correlated  with  a living  space  of  about  250 
square  meters  is  easily  derived  from  certain 
abris  in  the  limestone  valleys  of  southern 
France,  but  I know  of  many  exceptions  to 
these  figures  in  southern  Germany  and  Yugo- 
slavia, where  one  finds  just  as  many  tools  in  a 
much  smaller  area — perhaps  10  square  meters. 
Density  of  material  varies,  associations  vary, 
the  condition  of  artifacts  varies,  and  there  are 
problematic  intrasite  patterns  that  we  are  only 
now  beginning  to  study. 

From  all  this  varied  data  we  want  to  derive 
some  ideas  about  man’s  activities  in  the  distant 
past.  I think  we  can  do  this.  But  it  seems  to  me 
that  generalizations  about  the  entire  Pleisto- 
cene or  the  earlier  parts  of  it  concerning 
hominid  extractive  efficiency,  distribution, 
ecological  adaptation,  or  group  size  are  all 
highly  premature.  Now  that  we  are  getting  a 
lot  of  data  from  field  studies,  we  find  that  all 
of  these  things  are  tremendously  variable.  Per- 
haps in  ten  more  years,  with  the  analysis  of 
this  data,  it  will  be  possible  to  make  some  new 
observations  and  deductions  that  will  be 
solidly  founded,  rather  than  analogically 
argued. 

Turnbull:  I have  noticed  a great  difference 
in  the  tone  of  the  presentations  by  archeologists 
and  those  of  the  social  anthropologists.  The 
archeologists  have  shown  a great  awareness  of 
the  limitations  of  their  data  and  the  inter- 
pretations of  it,  while  the  rest  of  us  have  all 
spoken  as  though  we  knew  what  we  were 
talking  about.  I think  that  both  we  and  the 
archeologists  should  be  aware  of  the  limitations 
of  our  methods,  our  data,  and  our  interpreta- 
tions. As  social  anthropologists,  we  hear 
people  make  noises,  and  we  can  try  to  under- 
stand them,  but  how  close  do  we  really  get  to 
the  concepts  that  they  have  in  their  minds? 
The  intellectual  problem  of  bringing  our  own 
personalities  into  the  field,  and  the  physical 
problem  of  keeping  track  of  all  the  activities 
going  on  in  a tribe  of  2,000  people  over  the 
period  of  a year — all  such  things  force  us  to 
recognize  that  our  results  are  necessarily  partial 
and  tentative. 

Sharp:  I second  what  Colin  Turnbull  has 
said  and  suggest  that  the  ethnologist  might  be 
of  grea  ter  help  to  the  archeologist  if  the  ethno- 
logist were  more  sophisticated  in  his  knowledge 
of  archeological  problems.  I would  suggest  a 


Discussions,  Part  VI  289 


project  in  which  archeologists  might  interview 
some  of  the  ethnologists  who  have  lived  with 
hunter-gatherers,  and  specify  the  kinds  of  in- 
formation that  they  could  best  use.  I once 
wrote  a paper  on  what  would  be  found  by  the 
archeologist  at  a campsite  abandoned  by  a 
North  Australian  group,  presented  copies  of 
it  to  several  archeologists,  and  then  discovered 
that  I simply  had  not  answered  the  questions 
they  were  interested  in.  So  I suggest  that  they 
come  to  us  and  tell  us  about  the  kinds  of  ques- 
tions that  need  to  be  answered. 

Clark:  I should  like  to  differ  from  Dr. 
Sharp  and  say  that  I think  it  essential  that  the 
archeologist  and  the  ethnographer  work  to- 
gether. As  things  are  now  set  up,  it  is  quite 
impossible  for  one  man  to  do  both  jobs.  And, 
after  all,  we  have  been  going  to  ethnographers 
for  a number  of  years  now  to  get  information 
and  we  have  not  obtained  it,  because  they  have 
not  been  trained  well  enough  in  archeology  to 
observe  anything  of  particular  interest  to  us.  In- 
deed, up  until  a very  few  years  ago,  such  compa- 
rative enterprises  were  not  of  interest  to  anyone. 

DeVore:  For  years,  social  anthropologists 
have  been  asked  to  be  discussants  at  archeo- 
logical symposia,  and  a few  have  had  the 
temerity  to  try  this.  They  sat  in  mild  shock  as 
they  looked  at  slides  of  multi-colored  sections, 
vast  profusions  of  scatter  patterns,  and  the 
like  . . . and  were  then  asked  to  comment!  It 
is  a pleasure  occasionally  to  reverse  the  setting, 
to  expose  archeologists  to  the  complexity  of  the 
ethnographic  data.  Now  that  archeologists  are 
finding  enough  living  floors  to  be  able  to  des- 


cribe the  variation  within  local  areas,  it  seems 
appropriate  to  recall  that  in  social  anthro- 
pology we  have  had  this  method  of  controlled 
comparison  for  some  time.  And  I suspect  that 
it  may  be  at  this  level  of  generalization  that  we 
may  achieve  a greater  rapprochement  between 
the  two  disciplines. 

Some  years  ago  archeologists  had  to  aban- 
don the  notion  that  any  one  person  could  en- 
compass all  the  fields  of  expertise  necessary  to 
extract  the  information  obtainable  from  a site. 
So  bones,  stones,  soils,  pollen,  and  charcoal  are 
turned  over  to  the  people  who  are  equipped  to 
analyze  them.  In  social  anthropology  the  tradi- 
tion has  run  counter  to  this  trend.  The  stereo- 
type of  the  ethnographer  is  still  the  lone  man 
with  “his”  people.  Yet  it  is  now  clear  that  we 
cannot  possibly  train  our  students  to  be  com- 
petent zoologists  and  botanists,  to  collect  and 
analyze  blood  samples,  do  demographic 
studies,  linguistic  analysis,  to  plot  the  living 
floors  carefully  and  analyze  the  debris  left  by 
hunter-gatherers,  and  so  on.  It  seems  perfectly 
obvious  that  social  anthropologists  must  also 
have  specialists,  if  only  because — leaving  aside 
the  important  matter  of  training — there  is  not 
enough  time  for  one  man  to  do  all  these  things 
in  the  field.  I am  not  implying  that  it  is  possible 
for  us  to  collect  all  the  data  that  anyone  at  any 
future  time  will  need,  but  I do  share  the  feeling 
expressed  by  Professor  Levi-Strauss  that  re- 
search on  hunter-gatherers  is  of  the  utmost 
urgency.  And  given  this  urgency,  I see  no 
excuse  for  our  not  collecting  all  the  data  that 
we  already  know  or  believe  to  be  significant. 


Part  VII 

Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 


The  Evolution  of  Hunting 


SHERWOOD  L.  WASHBURN  AND  C.  S.  LANCASTER 


It  is  significant  that  the  title  of  this  symposium 
is  Man  the  Hunter  for,  in  contrast  to  carni- 
vores, human  hunting,  if  done  by  males,  is 
based  on  a division  of  labor  and  is  a social  and 
technical  adaptation  quite  different  from  that 
of  other  mammals.1  Human  hunting  is  made 
possible  by  tools,  but  it  is  far  more  than  a 
technique  or  even  a variety  of  techniques.  It 
is  a way  of  life,  and  the  success  of  this  adapta- 
tion (in  its  total  social,  technical,  and  psycho- 
logical dimensions)  has  dominated  the  course 
of  human  evolution  for  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  years.  In  a very  real  sense  our  intellect, 
interests,  emotions,  and  basic  social  life — all 
are  evolutionary  products  of  the  success  of  the 
hunting  adaptation.  When  anthropologists 
speak  of  the  unity  of  mankind,  they  are  stating 
that  the  selection  pressures  of  the  hunting  and 
gathering  way  of  life  were  so  similar  and  the 
result  so  successful  that  populations  of  Homo 
sapiens  are  still  fundamentally  the  same  every- 
where. In  this  essay  we  are  concerned  with  the 
general  characteristics  of  man  that  we  believe 
can  be  attributed  to  the  hunting  way  of  life. 

Perhaps  the  importance  of  the  hunting  way 
of  life  in  producing  man  is  best  shown  by  the 

1.  This  paper  is  part  of  a program  on  primate  be- 
havior, supported  by  the  United  States  Public  Health 
Service  (Grant  No.  8623)  and  aided  by  a Research 
Professorship  in  the  Miller  Institute  for  Basic  Research 
in  Science  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley. 
We  wish  to  thank  Dr.  Phyllis  C.  Jay  for  her  helpful 
criticism  and  suggestions  about  this  paper. 


length  of  time  hunting  has  dominated  human 
history.  The  genus  Homo 2 has  existed  for  some 
600,000  years,  and  agriculture  has  been  impor- 
tant only  during  the  last  few  thousand  years. 
Even  6,000  years  ago  large  parts  of  the  world’s 
population  were  nonagricultural,  and  the  en- 
tire evolution  of  man  from  the  earliest  popula- 
tions of  Homo  erectus  to  the  existing  races  took 
place  during  the  period  in  which  man  was  a 
hunter.  The  common  factors  that  dominated 
human  evolution  and  produced  Homo  sapiens 
were  preagricultural.  Agricultural  ways  of  life 
have  dominated  less  than  1 per  cent  of  human 
history,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  major 
biological  changes  during  that  period  of  time. 
The  kind  of  minor  biological  changes  that 
occurred  and  which  are  used  to  characterize 
modern  races  were  not  common  to  Homo 
sapiens.  The  origin  of  all  common  characteris- 
tics must  be  sought  in  preagricultural  times. 
Probably  all  experts  would  agree  that  hunting 
was  a part  of  the  social  adaptation  of  all  popu- 
lations of  the  genus  Homo,  and  many  would 
regard  Australopithecus 3 as  a still  earlier  hominid 
who  was  already  a hunter,  although  possibly 
much  less  efficient  than  the  later  forms.  If  this 

2.  The  term  Homo  includes  Java,  Pekin,  Mauer,  etc., 
and  later  forms. 

3.  Using  the  term  to  include  both  the  small  A. 
africanus  and  large  A.  robustus  forms.  Simpson  (1966) 
briefly  and  clearly  discusses  the  taxonomy  of  these 
forms  and  of  the  fragments  called  Homo  habilis. 


293 


294  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

is  true  and  if  the  Pleistocene  period  had  a 
duration  of  three  million  years,  then  pre-Homo 
erectus  human  tool  using  and  hunting  lasted  for 
at  least  four  times  as  long  as  the  duration  of  the 
genus  Homo  (Lancaster,  1968).  No  matter  how 
the  earlier  times  may  ultimately  be  interpreted, 
the  observation  of  more  hunting  among  apes 
than  was  previously  suspected  (Goodall,  1965) 
and  increasing  evidence  for  hunting  by  Aus- 
tralopithecus strengthens  the  position  that  less 
than  1 per  cent  of  human  history  has  been 
dominated  by  agriculture.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  the  consideration  of  hunting  is  so  impor- 
tant for  the  understanding  of  human  evolution. 

When  hunting  and  the  way  oflife  of  succes- 
sive populations  of  the  genus  Homo  are  con- 
sidered, it  is  important  to  remember  that  there 
must  have  been  both  technical  and  biological 
progress  during  this  vast  period  of  time.  Al- 
though the  locomotor  system  appears  to  have 
changed  very  little  in  the  last  500,000  years, 
the  brain  did  increase  in  size  and  the  form  of 
the  face  changed.  But  for  present  purposes  it 
is  particularly  necessary  to  direct  attention  to 
the  cultural  changes  that  occurred  in  the  last 
ten  or  fifteen  thousand  years  before  agriculture. 
There  is  no  convenient  term  for  this  period  of 
time,  traditionally  spoken  of  as  the  end  of  the 
Upper  Paleolithic  and  the  Mesolithic,  but 
Binford  and  Binford  (1966a)  have  rightly  em- 
phasized its  importance. 

During  most  of  human  history,  water  must 
have  been  a major  physical  and  psychological 
barrier  and  the  inability  to  cope  with  water  is 
shown  in  the  archeological  record  by  the  ab- 
sence of  remains  of  fish,  shellfish,  or  any  object 
that  required  going  deeply  into  water  or  using 
boats.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  resources 
of  river  and  sea  were  utilized  until  this  late 
preagricultural  period,  and  since  the  consump- 
tion of  shellfish  in  particular  leaves  huge 
middens,  the  negative  evidence  is  impressive. 
It  is  likely  that  the  basic  problem  in  utilization 
of  resources  from  sea  or  river  was  that  man 
cannot  swim  naturally  but  to  do  so  must  learn 
a difficult  skill.  In  monkeys  the  normal  quad- 
rupedal running  motions  serve  to  keep  them 
afloat  and  moving  quite  rapidly.  A macaque, 
for  example,  does  not  have  to  learn  any  new 
motor  habit  in  order  to  swim.  But  the  loco- 
motor patterns  of  gibbons  and  apes  will  not 
keep  them  above  the  water  surface,  and  even 


a narrow,  shallow  stream  is  a barrier  for  the 
gorilla  (Schaller,  1963).  For  early  man,  water 
was  a barrier  and  a danger,  not  a resource. 
(Obviously  water  was  important  for  drinking, 
for  richer  vegetation  along  rivers  and  lake- 
shores,  and  for  concentrating  animal  life.  Here 
we  are  referring  to  water  as  a barrier  prior  to 
swimming  and  boats,  and  we  stress  that, 
judging  from  the  behavior  of  contemporary 
apes,  even  a small  stream  may  be  a major 
barrier.) 

In  addition  to  the  conquest  of  water,  there 
seems  to  have  been  great  technical  progress  in 
this  late  preagricultural  period.  Along  with  a 
much  wider  variety  of  stone  tools  of  earlier 
kinds,  the  archeological  record  shows  bows  and 
arrows,  grinding  stones,  boats,  houses  of  much 
more  advanced  types  and  even  villages,  sledges 
drawn  by  animals  and  used  for  transport,  and 
the  domestic  dog.  These  facts  have  two  special 
kinds  of  significance  for  this  symposium.  First, 
the  technology  of  all  the  living  hunters  belongs 
to  this  late  Mesolithic  era  at  the  earliest,  and 
many  have  elements  borrowed  from  agricul- 
tural and  metal-using  peoples.  Second,  the 
occasional  high  densities  of  hunters  mentioned 
as  problems  and  exceptions  at  the  symposium 
are  based  on  this  very  late  and  modified  exten- 
sion of  the  hunting  and  gathering  way  of  life. 
For  example,  the  way  oflife  of  the  tribes  of  the 
Northwest  Coast,  with  polished  stone  axes  for 
woodworking,  boats,  and  extensive  reliance  on 
products  of  the  river  and  sea,  should  be  seen  as 
a very  late  adaptation.  Goldschmidt’s  distinc- 
tion (1959,  pp.  185-93)  between  nomadic  and 
sedentary  hunting  and  gathering  societies 
makes  this  point  in  a slightly  different  way. 
He  shows  the  social  elaboration  which  comes 
with  the  settled  groups  with  larger  populations. 

The  presence  of  the  dog  (Zeuner,  1963)  is  a 
good  index  of  the  late  preagricultural  period, 
and  domestic  dogs  were  used  by  hunters  in 
Africa,  Australia,  and  the  Americas.  Among 
the  Eskimo,  dogs  were  used  in  hunting,  for 
transportation,  as  food  in  time  of  famine,  and 
as  watchdogs.  With  dogs,  sleds,  boats,  metal, 
and  complex  technology,  Eskimos  may  be  a 
better  example  of  the  extremes  to  which  human 
adaptation  can  go  than  an  example  of  primi- 
tive hunting  ways.  Although  hardly  mentioned 
at  the  symposium,  dogs  were  of  great  impor- 
tance in  hunting,  for  locating,  tracking,  bringing 


Washburn  and  Lancaster  The  Evolution  of  Hunting 


to  bay,  and  even  killing.  Lee  (1965,  p.  1 3 1 ) 
reports  that  one  Bushman  with  a trained  pack 
of  hunting  dogs  brought  in  75  per  cent  of  the 
meat  of  a camp.  Six  other  resident  hunters 
lacked  hunting  packs  and  accounted  for  only 
25  pet  cent  of  the  meat.  Dogs  may  be  impor- 
tant in  hunting  even  very  large  animals;  in  the 
Amboseli  Game  Reserve  in  Kenya  one  of  us 
saw  two  small  dogs  bring  a rhinoceros  to  bay 
and  dodge  repeated  charges. 

With  the  acquisition  of  dogs,  bows,  and  boats 
it  is  certain  that  hunting  became  much  more 
complex  in  the  last  few  thousand  years  before 
agriculture.  The  antiquity  of  traps,  snares,  and 
poisons  is  unknown,  but  it  appears  that  for 
thousands  of  years  man  was  able  to  kill  large 
game  close  in  with  spear  or  axe.  As  Brues 
(1959)  has  shown,  this  limits  the  size  of  the 
hunters,  and  there  are  no  very  large  or  very 
small  fossil  men.  Pygmoid  hunters  of  large 
game  are  probably  possible  only  if  hunting  is 
with  bows,  traps,  and  poison.  It  is  remarkable 
that  nearly  all  the  estimated  statures  for  fossil 
men  fall  between  5 feet  2 inches  and  5 feet  10 
inches.  This  suggests  that  strong  selection 
pressures  kept  human  stature  within  narrow 
limits  for  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years  and 
that  these  pressures  relaxed  a few  thousand 
years  ago,  allowing  the  evolution  of  a much 
wider  range  of  statures. 

Gathering  and  the  preparation  of  food  also 
seem  to  have  become  more  complex  during 
the  last  few  thousand  years  before  agriculture. 
Obviously  gathering  by  nonhuman  primates  is 
limited  to  things  that  can  be  eaten  immediately. 
In  constrast,  man  gathers  a wide  range  of  items 
that  he  cannot  digest  without  soaking,  boiling, 
grinding,  or  other  special  preparation.  Seeds 
may  have  been  a particularly  important  addi- 
tion to  the  human  diet  because  they  are  abun- 
dant and  can  be  stored  easily.  Since  grinding 
stones  appear  before  agriculture,  grinding  and 
boiling  may  have  been  the  necessary  pre- 
conditions to  the  discovery  of  agriculture. 
One  can  easily  imagine  that  people  who  were 
grinding  seeds  would  see  repeated  examples  of 
seeds  sprouting  or  being  planted  by  accident. 
Grinding  and  boiling  were  certainly  known  to 
the  preagricultural  peoples,  and  this  knowledge 
could  spread  along  an  Arctic  route,  setting  the 
stage  for  a nearly  simultaneous  discovery  of 
agriculture  in  both  the  New  and  Old  Worlds. 


295 

It  was  not  necessary  for  agriculture  itself  to 
spread  through  the  Arctic  but  only  the  seed- 
using technology,  which  could  then  lead  to  the 
discovery  of  seed  planting.  If  this  analysis  is  at 
all  correct,  then  the  hunting-gathering  adapta- 
tion of  the  Indians  of  Galifornia,  for  example, 
should  be  seen  as  representing  the  possibilities 
of  this  late  preagricultural  gathering,  making 
possible  much  higher  population  densities  than 
would  have  been  the  case  in  pregrinding  and 
preboiling  economy. 

Whatever  the  fate  of  these  speculations,  we 
think  that  the  main  conclusion,  based  on  the 
archeological  record,  ecological  considerations, 
and  the  ethnology  of  the  surviving  hunter- 
gatherers,  will  be  sustained.  In  the  last  few 
thousand  years  before  agriculture,  both  hunt- 
ing and  gathering  became  much  more  com- 
plex. This  final  adaptation,  including  the  use 
of  products  of  river  and  sea  and  the  grinding 
and  cooking  of  otherwise  inedible  seeds  and 
nuts,  was  worldwide,  laid  the  basis  for  the 
discovery  of  agriculture,  and  was  much  more 
effective  and  diversified  than  the  previously 
existing  hunting  and  gathering  adaptations. 

Hunting  by  members  of  the  genus  Homo 
throughout  the  600,000  years  that  the  genus 
has  persisted  has  included  the  killing  of  large 
numbers  of  big  animals.  This  implies  the 
efficient  use  of  tools,  as  Birdsell  stressed  at  the 
symposium.  The  adaptive  value  of  hunting 
large  animals  has  been  shown  by  Bourliere 
(1963),  who  demonstrated  that  75  per  cent  of 
the  meat  available  to  human  hunters  in  the 
eastern  Congo  was  in  elephant,  buffalo,  and 
hippopotamus.  It  is  some  measure  of  the  suc- 
cess of  human  hunting  that  when  these  large 
species  are  protected  in  game  reserves  (as  in 
the  Murchison  Falls  or  Queen  Elizabeth  Parks 
in  Uganda),  they  multiply  rapidly  and  destroy 
the  vegetation.  Elephants  alone  can  destroy 
trees  more  rapidly  than  they  are  replaced 
naturally,  as  they  do  in  the  Masai  Amboseli 
Reserve  in  Kenya.  Since  the  predators  are  also 
protected  in  reserves,  it  appears  that  human 
hunters  have  been  killing  enough  large  game  to 
maintain  the  balance  of  nature  for  many 
thousands  of  years.  It  is  tempting  to  think  that 
man  replaced  the  saber-toothed  tiger  as  the 
major  predator  of  large  game,  both  controlling 
the  numbers  of  the  game  and  causing  the  ex- 
tinction of  Old  World  saber-tooths.  We  think 


296  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

that  hunting  and  butchering  large  animals  put 
a maximum  premium  on  cooperation  among 
males,  a behavior  that  is  at  an  absolute  mini- 
mum among  the  nonhuman  primates.  It  is 
difficult  to  imagine  the  killing  of  creatures  such 
as  cave  bears,  mastodons,  mammoths — or 
Dinotherium  at  a much  earlier  time — without 
highly  coordinated,  cooperative  action  among 
males.  It  may  be  that  the  origin  of  male-male 
associations  lies  in  the  necessities  of  cooperation 
in  hunting,  butchering,  and  war.  Certainly 
butchering  sites,  such  as  described  by  F.  Clark 
Howell  in  Spain,  imply  that  the  organization 
of  the  community  for  hunting  large  animals 
goes  back  for  many,  many  thousands  of  years. 
From  the  biological  point  of  view,  the  develop- 
ment of  such  organizations  would  have  been 
paralleled  by  selection  for  an  ability  to  plan 
and  cooperate  (or  reduction  of  rage).  Because 
females  and  juveniles  may  be  involved  in 
hunting  small  creatures,  the  social  organization 
of  big-game  hunting  would  also  lead  to  an 
intensification  of  a sexual  division  of  labor. 

It  is  important  to  stress,  as  noted  before,  that 
human  hunting  is  a set  of  ways  of  life.  It 
involves  divisions  of  labor  between  male  and 
female,  sharing  according  to  custom,  coopera- 
tion among  males,  planning,  knowledge  of 
many  species  and  large  areas,  and  technical 
skill.  Goldschmidt  (1966,  p.  87  ff.)  has  stressed 
the  uniqueness  and  importance  of  human 
sharing,  both  in  the  family  and  in  the  wider 
society,  and  Lee  (personal  communication) 
emphasizes  orderly  sharing  as  fundamental  to 
human  hunting  society.  The  importance  of 
seeing  human  hunting  as  a whole  social  pattern 
is  well  illustrated  by  the  old  idea,  recently  re- 
vived, that  the  way  of  life  of  our  ancestors  was 
similar  to  that  of  wolves  rather  than  that  of 
apes  or  monkeys.  But  this  completely  misses 
the  special  nature  of  the  human  adaptation. 
Human  females  do  not  go  out  and  hunt  and 
then  regurgitate  to  their  young  when  they  re- 
turn. Human  young  do  not  stay  in  dens  but 
are  carried  by  mothers.  Male  wolves  do  not 
kill  with  tools,  butcher,  and  share  with  females 
who  have  been  gathering.  In  an  evolutionary 
sense  the  whole  human  pattern  is  new,  and  it 
is  the  success  of  this  particularly  human  way 
that  dominated  human  evolution  and  deter- 
mined the  relation  of  biology  and  culture  for 
thousands  of  years.  Judging  from  the  archeo- 


logical record,  it  is  probable  that  the  major 
features  of  this  human  way,  possibly  even  in- 
cluding the  beginnings  of  language,  had  evolved 
by  the  time  of  Homo  erectusA 

The  World  View  of  the  Hunter 

Levi-Strauss  urged  that  we  study  the  world 
view  of  hunters,  and,  perhaps  surprisingly, 
some  of  the  major  aspects  of  world  view  can  be 
traced  from  the  archeological  record.  We  have 
already  mentioned  that  boats  and  the  entire 
complex  of  fishing,  hunting  sea  mammals,  and 
using  shellfish  was  late.  With  this  new  orienta- 
tion, wide  rivers  and  seas  changed  from  bar- 
riers to  pathways  and  sources  of  food,  and  the 
human  attitude  toward  water  must  have 
changed  completely.  But  many  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  years  earlier,  perhaps  with  Aus- 
tralopithecus, the  relation  of  the  hunters  to  the 
land  must  also  have  changed  from  an  earlier 
relationship  which  may  be  inferred  from 
studies  of  contemporary  monkeys  and  apes. 
Social  groups  of  nonhuman  primates  occupy 
exceedingly  small  areas,  and  the  vast  majority 

4.  In  speculations  of  this  kind,  it  is  well  to  keep  the 
purpose  of  the  speculation  and  the  limitation  of  the 
evidence  in  mind.  Our  aim  is  to  understand  human 
evolution.  What  shaped  the  course  of  human  evolution 
was  a succession  of  successful  adaptations,  both  biological 
and  cultural.  These  may  be  inferred  in  part  from  the 
direct  evidence  of  the  archeological  record.  But  the 
record  is  very  incomplete.  For  example,  Lee  (personal 
communication)  has  described,  for  the  Bushmen,  how 
large  game  may  be  butchered  where  it  falls  and  only  meat 
brought  back  to  camp.  This  kind  of  behavior  means  that 
analysis  of  bones  around  living  sites  is  likely  to  under- 
estimate both  the  amount  and  variety  of  game  killed. 
If  there  is  any  evidence  that  large  animals  were  killed, 
it  is  probable  that  far  more  were  killed  than  the  record 
shows.  Just  as  the  number  of  human  bones  gives  no 
indication  of  the  number  of  human  beings,  the  number 
of  animal  bones,  although  it  provides  clues  to  the  exis- 
tence of  hunting,  gives  no  direct  evidence  of  how  many 
animals  were  killed.  The  Pleistocene  way  of  life  can  only 
be  known  by  inference  and  speculation.  Obviously, 
speculations  are  based  on  much  surer  ground  when  the 
last  few  thousand  years  are  under  consideration.  Ethno- 
graphic information  is  then  directly  relevant  and  the 
culture  bearers  are  of  our  own  species.  As  we  go  farther 
back  in  time,  there  is  less  evidence  and  the  biological 
and  cultural  difference  becomes  progressively  greater. 
Yet  it  was  in  those  remote  times  that  the  human  way 
took  shape,  and  it  is  only  through  speculation  that  we 
may  gain  some  insights  into  what  the  life  of  our 
ancestors  may  have  been. 


Washburn  and  Lancaster  The  Evolution  of  Hunting 


of  animals  probably  spend  their  entire  lives 
within  less  than  four  or  five  square  miles.  Even 
though  they  have  excellent  vision  and  can  see 
for  many  miles,  especially  from  tops  of  trees, 
they  make  no  effort  to  explore  more  than  a 
tiny  fraction  of  the  area  they  see.  Even  for 
gorillas  the  range  is  only  about  fifteen  square 
miles  (Schaller,  1963),  and  it  is  of  the  same 
order  of  magnitude  for  savanna  baboons 
(DeVore  and  Hall,  1965).  When  Hall  tried  to 
drive  a troop  of  baboons  beyond  the  end  of 
their  range,  they  refused  to  be  driven  and 
doubled  back  into  familiar  territory,  although 
they  were  easy  to  drive  within  the  range.  The 
known  area  is  a psychological  reality,  clear  in 
the  minds  of  the  animals.  Only  a small  part  of 
even  this  limited  range  is  used,  and  exploration 
is  confined  to  the  canopy,  lower  branches,  and 
bushes,  or  ground,  depending  on  the  biology 
of  the  particular  species.  Napier  (1962)  has 
discussed  this  highly  differential  use  of  a single 
area  by  several  species.  In  marked  contrast, 
human  hunters  are  familiar  with  very  large 
areas.  In  the  area  studied  by  Lee  (1965), 
eleven  waterholes  and  600  square  miles  sup- 
ported 248  Bushmen,  a figure  less  than  the 
number  of  baboons  supported  by  a single 
waterhole  and  a few  square  miles  in  the 
Amboseli  Reserve  in  Kenya.  The  most  minor 
hunting  expedition  covers  an  area  larger  than 
most  nonhuman  primates  would  cover  in  a 
lifetime.  Interest  in  a large  area  is  human.  The 
small  ranges  of  monkeys  and  apes  restrict  the 
opportunities  for  gathering,  hunting,  and 
meeting  conspecifics,  and  limit  the  kind  of 
predation  and  the  number  of  diseases.  In  the 
wide  area,  hunters  and  gatherers  can  take  ad- 
vantage of  seasonal  foods,  and  only  man  among 
the  primates  can  migrate  long  distances 
seasonally.  In  the  small  area,  the  population 
must  be  carried  throughout  the  year  on  local 
resources,  and  natural  selection  favors  biology 
and  behavior  that  efficiently  utilize  these 
limited  opportunities.  But  in  the  wide  area, 
natural  selection  favors  the  knowledge  that 
enables  a group  to  utilize  seasonal  and  occa- 
sional food  sources.  Gathering  over  a wide 
and  diversified  area  implies  a greater  know- 
ledge of  flora  and  fauna,  knowledge  of  the 
annual  cycle,  and  a different  attitude  toward 
group  movements.  Clearly  one  of  the  great 
advantages  of  slow  maturation  is  that  learning 


297 

covers  a series  of  years,  and  the  meaning  of 
events  in  these  years  become  a part  of  the 
individual’s  knowledge.  With  rapid  matura- 
tion and  no  language,  the  chances  that  any 
member  of  the  group  will  know  the  appropriate 
behavior  for  rare  events  is  greatly  reduced. 

Moving  over  long  distances  creates  problems 
of  carrying  food  and  water.  Lee  (1965,  p.  124) 
has  pointed  out  that  the  sharing  of  food  even 
in  one  locality  implies  that  food  is  carried,  and 
there  is  no  use  in  gathering  quantities  of  fruit 
or  nuts  unless  they  can  be  moved.  If  women 
are  to  gather  while  men  hunt,  the  results  of 
the  labors  of  both  sexes  must  be  carried  back 
to  some  agreed  upon  location.  Meat  can  be 
carried  away  easily,  but  the  development  of 
some  sort  of  receptacles  for  carrying  vegetable 
products  may  have  been  one  of  the  most  funda- 
mental advances  in  human  evolution.  Without 
a means  of  carrying,  the  advantages  of  a large 
area  are  greatly  reduced,  and  sharing  implies 
that  a person  carries  much  more  than  one  can 
use.  However  that  may  be,  the  whole  human 
pattern  of  gathering  and  hunting  to  share — 
indeed,  the  whole  complex  of  economic  reci- 
procity that  dominates  so  much  of  human  life 
— is  unique  to  man.  In  its  small  range,  a 
monkey  gathers  only  what  it  itself  needs  to 
eat  at  that  moment.  Wherever  archeological 
evidence  can  suggest  the  beginnings  of  move- 
ment over  large  ranges,  cooperation,  and  shar- 
ing, it  is  dating  the  origin  of  some  of  the  most 
fundamental  aspects  of  human  behavior — the 
human  world  view.  We  believe  that  hunting 
large  animals  may  demand  all  these  aspects  of 
human  behavior  which  separate  man  so  sharply 
from  the  other  primates.  If  this  is  so,  then  the 
human  way  appears  to  be  as  old  as  Homo 
erectus. 

The  price  that  man  pays  for  his  high  mobility 
is  well  illustrated  by  the  problems  of  living  in 
the  African  savanna.  Man  is  not  adapted  to 
this  environment  in  the  same  sense  that  baboons 
or  vervet  monkeys  are.  Man  needs  much  more 
water,  and  without  preparation  and  cooking 
he  can  only  eat  a limited  number  of  the  foods 
on  which  the  local  primates  thrive.  Unless  there 
have  been  major  physiological  changes,  the 
diet  of  our  ancestors  must  have  been  far  more 
like  that  of  chimpanzees  than  like  that  of  a 
savanna-adapted  species.  Further,  man  cannot 
survive  the  diseases  of  the  African  savanna 


298  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

without  lying  down  and  being  cared  for.  Even 
when  sick,  the  locally  adapted  animals  are 
usually  able  to  keep  moving  with  their  troop; 
and  the  importance  to  their  survival  of  a home 
base  has  been  stressed  elsewhere  (DeVore  and 
Washburn,  1963).  Also  man  becomes  liable  to 
new  diseases  and  parasites  by  eating  meat,  and 
it  is  of  interest  that  the  products  of  the  sea, 
which  we  believe  were  the  last  class  of  foods 
added  to  human  diet,  are  widely  regarded  as 
indigestible  and  carry  diseases  to  which  man  is 
particularly  susceptible.  Although  many  hu- 
mans die  of  disease  and  injury,  those  who  do 
not,  almost  without  exception,  owe  their  lives  to 
others  who  cared  for  them  when  they  were  un- 
able to  hunt  or  gather,  and  this  uniquely  human 
caring  is  one  of  the  patterns  that  builds  social 
bonds  in  the  group  and  permits  the  species  to 
occupy  almost  every  environment  in  the  world. 

A large  territory  not  only  provides  a much 
wider  range  of  possible  foods  but  also  a greater 
variety  of  potentially  useful  materials.  With 
tool  use  this  variety  takes  on  meaning,  and 
even  the  earliest  pebble  tools  show  selection  in 
size,  form,  and  material.  When  wood  ceases  to 
be  just  something  to  climb  on,  hardness,  tex- 
ture, and  form  become  important*  Availability 
of  materials  is  critical  to  the  tool  user,  and  early 
men  must  have  had  a very  different  interest  in 
their  environment  from  that  of  monkeys  or 
apes.  Thus,  the  presence  of  tools  in  the  archeo- 
logical record  is  not  only  an  indication  of 
technical  progress  but  also  an  index  of  interest 
in  inanimate  objects  and  in  a much  larger  part 
of  the  environment  than  is  the  case  with  non- 
human primates. 

The  tools  of  the  hunters  include  the  earliest 
beautiful  manmade  objects,  the  symmetrical 
bifaces,  especially  those  of  the  Acheulian  tradi- 
tion. Just  how  they  were  used  is  still  a matter 
of  debate,  but,  as  contemporary  attempts  to 
copy  them  show,  their  manufacture  is  techni- 
cally difficult,  taking  much  time  and  practice 
and  a high  degree  of  skill.  The  symmetry  of 
these  tools  may  indicate  that  they  were  swung 
with  great  speed  and  force,  presumably  at- 
tached to  some  sort  of  handle.  A tool  that  is 
moved  slowly  does  not  have  to  be  symmetrical, 
but  balance  becomes  important  when  an  ob- 
ject is  swung  rapidly  or  thrown  with  speed. 
Irregularities  will  lead  to  deviations  in  the 
course  of  the  blow  or  the  trajectory  of  flight. 


An  axe  or  spear  to  be  used  with  speed  and 
power  is  subject  to  very  different  technical 
limitations  from  those  of  scrapers  or  digging 
sticks,  and  it  may  well  be  that  it  was  the 
attempt  to  produce  efficient  high-speed 
weapons  that  first  produced  beautiful,  sym- 
metrical objects. 

When  the  selective  advantage  of  a finely 
worked  point  over  an  irregular  one  is  con- 
sidered, it  must  be  remembered  that  a small 
difference  might  give  a very  large  advantage. 
A population  in  which  hunters  hit  the  game  5 
per  cent  more  frequently,  more  accurately,  or 
at  greater  distance  would  bring  back  much 
more  meat.  There  must  have  been  strong  selec- 
tion for  greater  skill  in  manufacture  and  use, 
and  it  is  no  accident  that  the  bones  of  small- 
brained men  ( Australopithecus ) are  never  found 
with  beautiful,  symmetrical  tools.  If  the  brains 
of  contemporary  apes  and  men  are  compared, 
the  areas  associated  with  manual  skills  (both 
in  cerebellum  and  cortex)  are  at  least  three 
times  as  large  in  man.  Clearly,  the  success  of 
tools  has  exerted  a great  influence  on  the  evolu- 
tion of  the  brain,  and  has  created  the  skills  that 
make  art  possible.  The  evolution  of  the  capacity 
to  appreciate  the  product  must  evolve  along 
with  the  skills  of  manufacture  and  use,  and 
the  biological  capacities  that  the  individual 
inherits  must  be  developed  in  play  and  prac- 
ticed in  games.  In  this  way,  the  beautiful, 
symmetrical  tool  becomes  a symbol  of  a level 
of  human  intellectual  achievement,  represent- 
ing far  more  than  just  the  tool  itself. 

In  a small  group  like  the  hunting  band, 
which  is  devoted  to  one  or  two  major  coopera- 
tive activities,  the  necessity  for  long  practice  in 
developing  skills  to  a very  high  level  restricts 
the  number  of  useful  arts,  and  social  organiza- 
tion is  relatively  simple.  Where  there  is  little 
division  of  labor,  all  men  learn  the  same  activi- 
ties, such  as  skill  in  the  hunt  or  in  war.  In 
sports  (like  the  decathlon)  we  take  it  for 
granted  that  no  one  individual  can  achieve 
record  levels  of  performance  in  more  than  a 
limited  set  of  skills.  This  kind  of  limitation  is 
partially  biological  but  it  is  also  a matter  of 
culture.  In  warfare,  for  example,  a wide 
variety  of  weapons  is  useful  only  if  there  are 
enough  men  to  permit  a division  of  labor  so 
that  different  groups  can  practice  different 
skills.  Handedness,  a feature  that  separates 


Washburn  and  Lancaster  The  Evolution  of  Hunting 


man  from  ape,  is  a part  of  this  biology  of  skill. 
To  be  ambidextrous  might  seem  to  be  ideal, 
but  in  fact  the  highest  level  of  skill  is  attained 
by  concentrating  both  biological  ability  and 
practice  primarily  on  one  hand.  The  evolution 
of  handedness  reflects  the  importance  of  skill, 
rather  than  mere  use. 

Hunting  changed  man’s  relations  to  other 
animals  and  his  view  of  what  is  natural.  The 
human  notion  that  it  is  normal  for  animals  to 
flee,  the  whole  concept  of  animals  being  wild, 
is  the  result  of  man’s  habit  of  hunting.  In  game 
reserves  many  different  kinds  of  animals  soon 
learn  not  to  fear  man,  and  they  no  longer  flee. 
James  Woodburn  took  a Hadza  into  the 
Nairobi  Park,  and  the  Hadza  was  amazed  and 
excited,  because  although  he  had  hunted  all 
his  life,  he  had  never  seen  such  a quantity  and 
variety  of  animals  close  at  hand.  His  previous 
view  of  animals  was  the  result  of  his  having 
been  their  enemy,  and  they  had  reacted  to 
him  as  the  most  destructive  carnivore.  In  the 
park  the  Hadza  hunter  saw  for  the  first  time 
the  peace  of  the  herbivorous  world.  Prior  to 
hunting,  the  relations  of  our  ancestors  to  other 
animals  must  have  been  very  much  like  those 
of  the  other  noncarnivores.  They  could  have 
moved  close  among  the  other  species,  fed  beside 
them,  and  shared  the  same  waterholes.  But 
with  the  origin  of  human  hunting,  the  peaceful 
relationship  was  destroyed,  and  for  at  least  half 
a million  years  man  has  been  the  enemy  of  even 
the  largest  mammals.  In  this  way  the  whole 
human  view  of  what  is  normal  and  natural  in 
the  relation  of  man  to  animals  is  a product  of 
hunting,  and  the  world  of  flight  and  fear  is  the 
result  of  the  efficiency  of  the  hunters. 

Behind  this  human  view  that  the  flight  of 
animals  from  man  is  natural  lie  some  aspects 
of  human  psychology.  Men  enjoy  hunting  and 
killing,  and  these  activities  are  continued  as 
sports  even  when  they  are  no  longer  economi- 
cally necessary.  If  a behavior  is  important  to 
the  survival  of  a species  (as  hunting  was  for 
man  throughout  most  of  human  history),  then 
it  must  be  both  easily  learned  and  pleasurable 
(Hamburg,  1963).  Part  of  the  motivation  for 
hunting  is  the  immediate  pleasure  it  gives  the 
hunter,  and  the  human  killer  can  no  more 
afford  to  be  sorry  for  the  game  than  a cat  can 
for  its  intended  victim.  Evolution  builds  a 
relation  between  biology,  psychology,  and 


299 

behavior,  and,  therefore,  the  evolutionary  suc- 
cess of  hunting  exerted  a profound  effect  on 
human  psychology.  Perhaps,  this  is  most  easily 
shown  by  the  extent  of  the  efforts  devoted  to 
maintain  killing  as  a sport.  In  former  times 
royalty  and  nobility  maintained  parks  where 
they  could  enjoy  the  sport  of  killing,  and  today 
the  United  States  government  spends  many 
millions  of  dollars  to  supply  game  for  hunters. 
Many  people  dislike  the  notion  that  man  is 
naturally  aggressive  and  that  he  naturally  en- 
joys the  destruction  of  other  creatures.  Yet  we 
all  know  people  who  use  the  lightest  fishing 
tackle  to  prolong  the  fish’s  futile  struggle,  in 
order  to  maximize  the  personal  sense  of  mastery 
and  skill.  And  until  recently  war  was  viewed 
in  much  the  same  way  as  hunting.  Other 
human  beings  were  simply  the  most  dangerous 
game.  War  has  been  far  too  important  in 
human  history  for  it  to  be  other  than  pleasur- 
able for  the  males  involved.  It  is  only  recently, 
with  the  entire  change  in  the  nature  and  con- 
ditions of  war,  that  this  institution  has  been 
challenged,  that  the  wisdom  of  war  as  a 
normal  part  of  national  policy  or  as  an 
approved  road  to  personal  social  glory  has 
been  questioned. 

Human  killing  differs  from  killing  by  carni- 
vorous mammals  in  that  the  victims  are  fre- 
quently of  the  same  species  as  the  killer.  In 
carnivores  there  are  submission  gestures  or 
sounds  that  normally  stop  a fatal  attack 
(Lorenz,  1966).  But  in  man  there  are  no  effec- 
tive submission  gestures.  It  was  the  Roman 
emperor  who  might  raise  his  thumb;  the  vic- 
tim could  make  no  sound  or  gesture  that  might 
restrain  the  victor  or  move  the  crowd  to  pity. 
The  lack  of  biological  controls  over  killing  con- 
specifics  is  a character  of  human  killing  that 
separates  this  behavior  sharply  from  that  of 
other  carnivorous  mammals.  This  difference 
may  be  interpreted  in  a variety  of  ways.  It 
may  be  that  human  hunting  is  so  recent  from 
an  evolutionary  point  of  view  that  there  was 
not  enough  time  for  controls  to  evolve.  Or  it 
may  be  that  killing  other  humans  was  a part 
of  the  adaptation  from  the  beginning,  and  our 
sharp  separation  of  war  from  hunting  is  due  to 
the  recent  development  of  these  institutions. 
Or  it  may  be  simply  that  in  most  human  be- 
havior stimulus  and  response  are  not  tightly 
bound.  Whatever  the  origin  of  this  behavior, 


300  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

it  has  had  profound  effects  on  human  evolu- 
tion, and  almost  every  human  society  has  re- 
garded killing  members  of  certain  other  human 
societies  as  desirable  (D.  Freeman,  1964).  Cer- 
tainly this  has  been  a major  factor  in  man’s 
view  of  the  world,  and  every  folklore  contains 
tales  of  culture  heroes  whose  fame  is  based  on 
the  human  enemies  they  destroyed. 

The  extent  to  which  the  biological  bases  for 
killing  have  been  incorporated  into  human 
psychology  may  be  measured  by  the  ease  with 
which  boys  can  be  interested  in  hunting,  fish- 
ing, fighting,  and  games  of  war.  It  is  not  that 
these  behaviors  are  inevitable,  but  they  are 
easily  learned,  satisfying,  and  have  been 
socially  rewarded  in  most  cultures.  The  skills 
for  killing  and  the  pleasures  of  killing  are 
normally  developed  in  play,  and  the  patterns 
of  play  prepare  the  children  for  their  adult 
roles.  At  the  conference  Woodburn’s  excellent 
motion  pictures  showed  Hadza  boys  killing 
small  mammals,  and  Laughlin  described  how 
Aleuts  train  boys  from  early  childhood  so  that 
they  would  be  able  to  throw  harpoons  with 
accuracy  and  power  while  seated  in  kayaks. 
The  whole  youth  of  the  hunter  is  dominated 
by  practice  and  appreciation  of  the  skills  of  the 
adult  males,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  games 
motivates  the  practice  that  is  necessary  to  de- 
velop the  skills  of  weaponry.  Even  in  monkeys, 
rougher  play  and  play  fighting  are  largely  the 
activities  of  the  males,  and  the  young  females 
explore  less  and  show  a greater  interest  in 
infants  at  an  early  age.  These  basic  biological 
differences  are  reinforced  in  man  by  a division 
of  labor  which  makes  adult  sex  roles  differ  far 
more  in  humans  than  they  do  in  nonhuman 
primates.  Again,  hunting  must  be  seen  as  a 
whole  pattern  of  activities,  a wide  variety  of 
ways  of  life,  the  psychobiological  roots  of  which 
are  reinforced  by  play  and  by  a clear  identifi- 
cation with  adult  roles.  Hunting  is  more  than 
a part  of  the  economic  system,  and  the  animal 
bones  in  Choukoutien  are  evidence  of  the 
patterns  of  play  and  pleasure  of  our  ancestors. 

The  Social  Organization 
of  H uman  Hunting 

The  success  of  the  human  hunting  and  gather- 
ing way  of  life  lay  in  its  adaptability.  It  per- 


mitted a single  species  to  occupy  most  of  the 
earth  with  a minimum  of  biological  adaptation 
to  local  conditions.  The  occupation  of  Australia 
and  the  New  World  was  probably  late,  but 
even  so  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  other 
primate  species  occupied  more  than  a fraction 
of  the  area  of  Homo  erectus.  Obviously,  this 
adaptability  makes  any  detailed  reconstruction 
impossible,  and  we  are  not  looking  for  stages 
in  the  traditional  evolutionary  sense.  However, 
using  both  the  knowledge  of  the  contemporary 
primates  and  the  archeological  record,  certain 
important  general  conditions  of  our  evolution 
may  be  reconstructed.  For  example,  the  extent 
of  the  distribution  of  the  species  noted  above  is 
remarkable  and  gives  the  strongest  sort  of 
indirect  evidence  for  the  adaptability  of  the 
way  of  life,  even  half  a million  years  ago.  Like- 
wise all  evidence  suggests  that  the  local  group 
was  small.  Twenty  to  fifty  individuals  is  sug- 
gested by  Goldschmidt  (1959,  p.  187).  Such  a 
group  size  is  common  in  nonhuman  primates 
and  so  we  can  say  with  some  assurance  that 
the  number  did  not  increase  greatly  until  after 
agriculture.  This  means  that  the  number  of 
adult  males  who  might  cooperate  in  hunting 
or  war  was  very  limited,  and  this  sets  limits  to 
the  kinds  of  social  organizations  that  were 
possible.  Probably  one  of  the  great  adaptive 
advantages  of  language  was  that  it  permits  the 
planning  of  cooperation  between  local  groups, 
temporary  division  of  groups,  and  the  trans- 
mission of  information  over  a much  wider  area 
than  that  occupied  by  any  one  group. 

Within  the  group  of  the  nonhuman  pri- 
mates, the  mother  and  her  young  may  form  a 
subgroup  that  continues  even  after  the  young 
are  fully  grown  (Sade,  1965,  1966;  Yamada, 
1963).  This  grouping  affects  dominance, 
grooming,  and  resting  patterns,  and,  along 
with  dominance,  is  one  of  the  factors  giving 
order  to  the  social  relations  in  the  group.  The 
group  is  not  a horde  in  the  nineteenth-century 
sense,  but  it  is  ordered  by  positive  affectionate 
habits  and  by  the  strength  of  personal  domi- 
nance. Both  these  principles  continue  into 
human  society,  and  dominance  based  on  per- 
sonal achievement  must  have  been  particularly 
powerful  in  small  groups  living  physically 
dangerous  lives.  The  mother-young  group 
certainly  continued  and  the  bonds  must  have 
been  intensified  by  the  prolongation  of  infancy. 


Washburn  and  Lancaster  The  Evolution  of  Hunting 


But  in  human  society,  economic  reciprocity  is 
added,  and  this  created  a wholly  new  set  of 
interpersonal  bonds. 

When  males  hunt  and  females  gather,  the 
results  are  shared  and  given  to  the  young,  and 
the  habitual  sharing  between  a male,  a female, 
and  their  offspring  becomes  the  basis  for  the 
human  family.  According  to  this  view,  the 
human  family  is  the  result  of  the  reciprocity 
of  hunting,  the  addition  of  a male  to  the 
mother-plus-young  social  group  of  the  monkeys 
and  apes. 

A clue  to  the  adaptive  advantage  and  evolu- 
tionary origin  of  our  psychological  taboo  on 
incest  is  provided  by  this  view  of  the  family. 
Incest  prohibitions  are  reported  universally 
among  humans  and  these  always  operate  to 
limit  sexual  activity  involving  subadults  within 
the  nuclear  family.  Taking  the  nuclear  family 
as  the  unit  of  account,  incest  prohibitions  tend 
to  keep  the  birth  rate  in  line  with  economic 
productivity.  If  in  creating  what  we  call  the 
family  the  addition  of  a male  is  important  in 
economic  terms,  then  the  male  who  is  added 
must  be  able  to  fulfill  the  role  of  a socially 
responsible  provider.  In  the  case  of  the  hunter, 
this  necessitates  a degree  of  skill  in  hunting  and 
a social  maturity  that  is  attained  some  years 
after  puberty.  As  a young  man  grows  up,  this 
necessary  delay  in  his  assumption  of  the  role  of 
provider  for  a female  and  her  young  is  paral- 
leled by  a taboo  which  prevents  him  from  pre- 
maturely adding  unsupported  members  to  the 
family.  Brother-sister  mating  could  result  in  an 
infant  while  the  brother  was  still  years  away 
from  effective  social  maturity.  Father-daughter 
incest  could  also  produce  a baby  without 
adding  a productive  male  to  the  family.  This 
would  be  quite  different  from  the  taking  of  a 
second  wife  which,  if  permitted,  occurs  only 
when  the  male  has  shown  he  is  already  able  to 
provide  for  and  maintain  more  than  one 
female. 

To  see  how  radically  hunting  changed  the 
economic  situation,  it  is  necessary  to  remember 
that  in  monkeys  and  apes  an  individual  simply 
eats  what  it  needs.  After  an  infant  is  weaned, 
it  is  on  its  own  economically  and  is  not  depen- 
dent on  adults.  This  means  that  adult  males 
never  have  economic  responsibility  for  any 
other  animal,  and  adult  females  do  only  when 
they  are  nursing.  In  such  a system,  there  is  no 


301 

economic  gain  in  delaying  any  kind  of  social 
relationship.  But  when  hunting  makes  females 
and  young  dependent  on  the  success  of  male 
skills,  there  is  a great  gain  to  the  family  mem- 
bers in  establishing  behaviors  which  prevent 
the  addition  of  infants,  unless  these  can  be 
supported. 

These  considerations  in  no  way  alter  the 
importance  of  the  incest  taboo  as  a deterrent 
to  role  conflict  in  the  family  and  as  the  neces- 
sary precondition  to  all  other  rules  of  exogamy. 
A set  of  behaviors  is  more  likely  to  persist  and 
be  widespread,  if  it  serves  many  uses,  and  the 
rule  of  parsimony  is  completely  wrong  when 
applied  to  the  explanation  of  social  situations. 
However,  these  considerations  do  alter  the 
emphasis  and  the  conditions  of  the  discussion 
of  incest.  In  the  first  place,  a mother-son  sexual 
avoidance  may  be  present  in  some  species  of 
monkeys  (Sade,  1966)  and  this  extremely 
strong  taboo  among  humans  requires  a dif- 
ferent explanation  than  the  one  we  have 
offered  for  brother-sister  and  father-daughter 
incest  prohibitions.  In  this  case,  the  role  con- 
flict argument  may  be  paramount.  Second, 
the  central  consideration  is  that  incest  produces 
pregnancies,  and  the  most  fundamental  adap- 
tive value  of  the  taboo  is  the  provision  of  situa- 
tions in  which  infants  are  more  likely  to  survive. 
In  the  reviews  of  the  incest  taboo  by  Aberle 
and  others  (1963)  and  Mair  (1965),  the  bio- 
logical advantages  of  the  taboo  in  controlling 
the  production  of  infants  are  not  adequately 
considered,  and  we  find  the  treatment  by 
Service  (1962)  closest  to  our  own.  In  a society 
in  which  the  majority  of  males  die  young,  but 
a few  live  on  past  forty,  the  probability  of  incest 
is  increased.  By  stressing  the  average  length  of 
life  rather  than  the  age  of  the  surviving  few, 
Slater  (1959)  underestimated  the  probability 
of  mating  between  close  relatives.  Vallois 
(1961,  p.  222)  has  summarized  the  evidence 
on  length  of  life  in  early  man  and  shows  that 
“few  individuals  passed  forty  years,  and  it  is 
only  quite  exceptionally  that  any  passed  fifty.” 

That  family  organization  may  be  attributed 
to  the  hunting  way  of  life  is  supported  by 
ethnography.  Since  the  same  economic  and 
social  problems  as  those  under  hunting  con- 
tinue under  agriculture,  the  institution  con- 
tinued. The  data  on  the  behavior  of  contem- 
porary monkeys  and  apes  also  show  why  this 


302  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

institution  was  not  necessary  in  a society  in 
which  each  individual  gets  its  own  food. 5 
Obviously  the  origin  of  the  custom  cannot  be 
dated,  and  we  cannot  prove  Homo  erectus  had 
a family  organized  in  the  human  way.  But  it 
can  be  shown  that  the  conditions  that  make 
the  family  adaptive  existed  at  the  time  of  Homo 
erectus.  The  evidence  of  hunting  is  clear  in  the 
archeological  record.  A further  suggestion  that 
the  human  kind  of  family  is  old  comes  from 
physiology;  the  loss  of  estrus  is  essential  to  the 
human  family  organization,  and  it  is  unlikely 
that  this  physiology,  which  is  universal  in 
contemporary  mankind,  evolved  recently. 

If  the  local  group  is  looked  upon  as  a source 
of  male-female  pairs  (an  experienced  hunter- 
provider  and  a female  who  gathers  and  who 
cares  for  the  young),  then  it  is  apparent  that 
a small  group  cannot  produce  pairs  regularly, 
since  chance  determines  whether  a particular 
child  is  a male  or  female.  If  the  number 
maturing  in  a given  year  or  two  is  small,  then 
there  may  be  too  many  males  or  females  (either 
males  with  no  mates  or  females  with  no  pro- 
viders). The  problem  of  excess  females  may  not 
seem  serious  today  or  in  agricultural  societies, 
but  among  hunters  it  was  recognized  and  was 
regarded  as  so  severe  that  female  infanticide 
was  often  practiced.  How  grave  the  problem 
of  imbalance  can  become  is  shown  by  the  fol- 
lowing hypothetical  example.  In  a society  of 
approximately  forty  individuals  there  might 
be  nine  couples.  With  infants  born  at  the  rate 
of  about  one  in  three  years,  this  would  give 
three  infants  per  year,  but  only  approximately 
one  of  these  three  would  survive  to  become 
fully  adult.  The  net  production  in  the  example 
would  be  one  child  per  year  in  a population  of 

5.  The  advantage  of  considering  both  the  social  group 
and  the  facilitating  biology  is  shown  by  considering  the 
“family”  in  the  gibbon.  The  social  group  consists  of  an 
adult  male,  an  adult  female,  and  their  young.  But  this 
group  is  maintained  by  extreme  territorial  behavior  in 
which  no  adult  male  tolerates  another,  by  aggressive 
females  with  large  canine  teeth,  and  by  very  low  sex 
drive  in  the  males.  The  male-female  group  is  the  whole 
society  (Carpenter  1941;  Ellefson,  1966).  The  gibbon 
group  is  based  on  a different  biology  from  that  of  the 
human  family  and  has  none  of  its  reciprocal  economic 
functions.  Although  the  kind  of  social  life  seen  in 
chimpanzees  lacks  a family  organization,  to  change  it 
into  that  of  a man  would  require  far  less  evolution  than 
would  be  required  in  the  case  of  the  gibbon. 


forty.  And  because  the  sex  of  the  child  is  ran- 
domly determined,  the  odds  that  all  the  child- 
ren would  be  male  for  a three-year  period  are 
1 in  8.  Likewise  the  odds  for  all  surviving  child- 
ren being  female  for  a three-vear  period  are  i 
in  8.  In  this  example  the  chances  of  all  surviv- 
ing children  being  of  one  sex  are  i in  4,  and 
smaller  departures  from  a 50/50  sex  ratio  would 
be  very  common. 

In  monkeys,  because  the  economic  unit  is 
the  individual  (not  a pair),  a surplus  of  females 
causes  no  problem.  Surplus  males  may  in- 
crease fighting  in  the  group  or  males  may 
migrate  to  other  groups. 

For  humans,  the  problem  of  imbalance  in 
sex  ratios  may  be  met  by  exogamy,  which 
permits  mates  to  be  obtained  from  a much 
wider  social  field.  The  orderly  pairing  of  hun- 
ter males  with  females  requires  a much  larger 
group  than  can  be  supported  locally  by  hunt- 
ing and  gathering,  and  this  problem  is  solved 
by  reciprocal  relations  among  several  local 
groups.  It  takes  something  on  the  order  of  100 
pairs  to  produce  enough  children  so  that  the 
sex  ratio  is  near  enough  to  50/50  for  social  life 
to  proceed  smoothly,  and  this  requires  a popu- 
lation of  approximately  500  people.  With 
smaller  numbers  there  will  be  constant  ran- 
dom fluctuations  in  the  sex  ratio  large  enough 
to  cause  social  problems..  This  argument  shows 
the  importance  of  a sizable  linguistic  com- 
munity, one  large  enough  to  cover  an  area  in 
which  many  people  may  find  suitable  mates 
and  make  alliances  of  many  kinds.  It  does  not 
mean  either  that  the  large  community  or  that 
exogamy  does  not  have  many  other  functions, 
as  outlined  by  Mair  (1965).  As  indicated 
earlier,  the  more  factors  that  favor  a custom, 
the  more  likely  it  is  to  be  geographically  wide- 
spread and  long  lasting.  What  the  argument 
does  stress  js  that  the  finding  of  mates  and  the 
production  of  babies  under  the  particular  con- 
ditions of  human  hunting  and  gathering  favor 
both  incest  taboo  and  exogamy  for  basic 
demographic  reasons. 

Assumptions  behind  this  argument  are  that 
social  customs  are  adaptive,  as  Tax  (1937)  has 
argued,  and  that  nothing  is  more  crucial  for 
evolutionary  success  than  the  orderly  produc- 
tion of  the  number  of  infants  that  can  be  sup- 
ported. This  argument  also  presumes  that,  at 
least  under  extreme  conditions,  these  necessities 


Washburn  and  Lancaster  The  Evolution  of  Hunting 


and  reasons  are  obvious  to  the  people  involved, 
as  infanticide  attests.  The  impossibility  of 
finding  suitable  mates  must  have  been  a com- 
mon experience  for  hunters  trying  to  exist  in 
very  small  groups,  and  the  initial  advantages 
of  exogamy,  kinship,  and  alliance  with  other 
such  groups  may  at  first  have  amounted  to  no 
more  than,  as  Whiting  said  at  the  conference, 
a mother  suggesting  to  her  son  that  he  might 
find  a suitable  mate  in  the  group  where  her 
brother  was  located. 

If  customs  are  adaptive  and  if  humans  are 
necessarily  opportunistic,  it  might  be  expected 
that  social  rules  would  be  particularly  labile 
under  the  conditions  of  small  hunting  and 
gathering  societies.  At  the  conference,  Mur- 
dock (Chapter  t,  this  volume)  pointed  out  the 
high  frequency  of  bilateral  kinship  systems 
among  hunters,  and  the  experts  on  Australia 
all  seemed  to  believe  that  the  Australian  sys- 
tems had  been  described  in  much  too  static 
terms.  Under  hunting  conditions,  systems  that 
allow  for  exceptions  and  local  adaptation  make 
sense  and  surely  political  dominance  and  status 
must  have  been  largely  achieved. 

Conclusion 

While  stressing  the  success  of  the  hunting  and 
gathering  way  of  life  with  its  great  diversity  of 
local  forms  and  while  emphasizing  the  way  it 
influenced  human  evolution,  we  must  also  take 
into  account  its  limitations.  There  is  no  indica- 
tion that  this  way  of  life  could  support  large 
communities  of  more  than  a few  million  people 
in  the  whole  world.  To  call  the  hunters 
“affluent”  (Sahlins,  Chapter  gb,  this  volume) 
is  to  give  a very  special  definition  to  the  word. 
During  much  of  the  year,  many  monkeys  can 
obtain  enough  food  in  only  three  *r  lour  hours 
of  gathering  each  day,  and  under  normal  con- 
ditions baboons  have  plenty  of  time  to  build 


303 

the  Taj  Mahal.  The  restriction  on  population, 
however,  is  the  lean  season  or  the  atypical  year, 
and,  as  Sahlins  recognized,  building  by  the 
hunters  and  the  accumulation  of  gains  was 
limited  by  motivation  and  technical  know- 
ledge, not  by  time.  Where  monkeys  are  fed, 
population  rises,  and  Koford  (1966)  estimates 
the  rate  of  increase  on  an  island  at  16  per  cent 
per  year. 

After  agriculture,  human  populations  in- 
creased dramatically  in  spite  of  disease,  war, 
and  slowly  changing  customs.  Even  with  fully 
human  ( Homo  sapiens)  biology,  language,  tech- 
nical sophistication,  cooperation,  art,  the  sup- 
port of  kinship,  the  control  of  custom  and 
political  power,  and  the  solace  of  religion — in 
spite  of  this  whole  web  of  culture  and  biology 
— the  local  group  in  the  Mesolithic  was  no 
larger  than  that  of  baboons.  Regardless  of 
statements  made  at  the  symposium  on  the  ease 
with  which  hunters  obtain  food  some  of  the 
time,  it  is  still  true  that  food  was  the  primary 
factor  in  limiting  early  human  populations,  as  is 
shown  by  the  events  subsequent  to  agriculture. 

The  agricultural  revolution,  continuing  into 
the  industrial  and  scientific  revolutions,  is  now 
freeing  man  from  the  conditions  and  restraints 
of  99  per  cent  of  his  history,  but  the  biology  of 
our  species  was  created  in  that  long  gathering 
and  hunting  period.  To  assert  the  biological 
unity  of  mankind  is  to  affirm  the  importance 
of  the  hunting  way  of  life.  It  is  to  claim  that, 
however  much  conditions  and  customs  may 
have  varied  locally,  the  main  selection  pres- 
sures that  forged  the  species  were  the  same. 
The  biology,  psychology,  and  customs  that 
separate  us  from  the  apes — all  these  we  owe 
to  the  hunters  of  time  past.  And,  although  the 
record  is  incomplete  and  speculation  looms 
larger  than  fact,  for  those  who  would  under- 
stand the  origin  and  nature  of  human  behavior 
there  is  no  choice  but  to  try  to  understand 
“Man  the  Hunter.” 


Hunting  : 

An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System 
and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance 


WILLIAM  S.  LAUGIILIN 


Introduction 

Hunting  is  the  master  behavior  pattern  of  the 
human  species.  It  is  the  organizing  activity 
which  integrated  the  morphological,  physio- 
logical, genetic,  and  intellectual  aspects  of  the 
individual  human  organisms  and  of  the  popu- 
lation who  compose  our  single  species.  Hunt- 
ing is  a way  of  life,  not  simply  a “subsistence 
technique,”  which  importantly  involves  com- 
mitments, correlates,  and  consequences  span- 
ning the  entire  biobehavioral  continuum  of  the 
individual  and  of  the  entire  species  of  which  he 
is  a member. 

That  man  achieved  a worldwide  distribution 
while  still  a hunter  reflects  the  enormous  uni- 
versality of  this  kind  of  behavioral  adaptation. 
The  corollary  fact  that  he  practiced  hunting 
for  99  per  cent  of  his  history  indicates  the 
significance  of  two  neglected  aspects:  (i)  hunt- 
ing is  a much  more  complex  organization  of 
behavior  than  is  currently  admitted  under  the 
traditional  “subsistence  technique”  categoriza- 
tion, and  (2)  the  intellectual  and  genetic  reper- 
toire of  the  animal  developed  in  this  behavioral 
regime  both  permitted  and  enabled  the  recent 
acquisition  of  civilization  to  be  a rapid  acquisi- 


tion and  to  be  developed  independently  by 
hunting  peoples  in  different  parts  of  the  world. 

The  total  biobehavioral  configuration  of 
hunting  includes  the  ethological  training  of 
children  to  be  skilled  observers  of  animal  be- 
havior, including  other  humans.  The  process 
itself  includes  .five  distinguishable  components 
whose  combinations  and  permutations  are  cer- 
tainly varied,  but  with  recurrent  and  widely 
distributed  commonalities. 

Hunting  is  an  active  process  which  puts 
motion  and  direction  into  the  diagram  of 
man’s  morphology,  technology,  social  organi- 
zation, and  ecological  relations.  Hunting  in- 
volves goals  and  motivations  for  which  intricate 
inhibition  systems  have  been  developed.  Hunt- 
ing has  placed  a premium  upon  inventiveness, 
upon  problem  solving,  and  has  imposed  a real 
penalty  for  failure  to  solve  the  problem.  There- 
fore it  has  contributed  as  much  to  advancing 
the  human  species  as  to  holding  it  together 
within  the  confines  of  a single  variable  species. 
A study  of  hunting  removes  the  tedious  ambi- 
guity contained  in  many  current  discussions  of 
the  importance  of  tools,  whether  tool  use 
means  that  tools  use  humans  or  that  humans 
use  tools. 


304 


Laughlin  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance 


Hunting  as 
an  Integrating 
Sequence  Behavior  Pattern 

Hunting  may  profitably  be  analyzed  as  a se- 
quence pattern  of  behavioral  complexes.  This 
analysis  recognizes  the  ordered  interdepen- 
dencies of  the  diverse  constituent  elements  of 
hunting  and  it  also  provides  a comparative 
basis  for  evaluating  the  functions  and  intensi- 
ties, their  similarities  and  dissimilarities,  in 
radically  different  cultures.  As  defined  here, 
hunting  consists  ol  five  series  of  patterned 
activities,  beginning  early  in  childhood  and 
extending  through  the  life  of  the  individual 
engaged  in  hunting.  These  five  behavior  com- 
plexes consist  of  ( i ) programming  the  child, 

(2)  scanning  or  the  collection  of  information, 

(3)  stalking  and  pursuit  of  game,  (4)  immobi- 
lization of  game,  including  the  killing  or  cap- 
ture of  game,  and  (5)  retrieval  of  the  game. 
Although  more  complexes  might  be  added, 
such  as  those  concerned  with  the  distribution 
of  game  and  its  various  uses,  none  can  be  sub- 
tracted without  impoverishing  an  apprecia- 
tion of  hunting. 

In  overall  perspective,  both  for  the  individual 
and  for  the  evolution  of  mankind,  this  behavior 
system  has  had  an  integrating  function.  It  has 
served  as  an  integrating  schedule  for  the  ner- 
vous system.  Hunting  is  obviously  an  instru- 
mental system  in  the  real  sense  that  something 
gets  done,  several  ordered  behaviors  are  per- 
formed with  a crucial  result.  The  technological 
aspects,  the  spears,  clubs,  handaxes,  and  all  the 
other  objects  suitable  for  museum  display,  are 
essentially  meaningless  apart  from  the  context 
in  which  they  are  used.  They  do  not  represent 
a suitable  place  to  begin  analysis  because  their 
position  in  the  sequence  is  remote  from  the 
several  preceding  complexes. 

Programming  Children 

Three  indispensable  parts  of  the  hunting  sys- 
tem are  programmed  into  the  child  beginning 
early  in  life.  These  are  the  habit  of  observation, 
a systematic  knowledge  of  animal  behavior, 
and  the  interpretation  and  appropriate  action 
for  living  with  animals  and  for  utilizing  them 
for  food  and  fabricational  purposes.  Owing  to 
the  fact  that  in  many  cultures  various  animals 


305 

are  endowed  with  souls,  that  there  are  animal 
beings  as  well  as  human  beings,  the  killing  and 
eating  of  animal  beings  may  be  fraught  with 
spiritual  hazards  (Rasmussen,  1929,  p.  56). 
Appropriate  behavior  toward  animals  is  pro- 
minently based  upon  familiarity  with  animal 
behavior  and  includes  ways  of  living  peacefully 
with  animals,  of  maintaining  a discourse  with 
them,  as  well  as  the  appropriate  behaviors,  the 
highly  coordinated  movements  of  the  hunter 
proceeding  toward  a kill,  and  appropriate 
social  behavior  where  other  hunters  are  in- 
volved. Within  a single  community  it  is  possible 
to  arrange  the  hunters  in  a rank  order  in  terms 
of  their  efficiency  or  productivity.  It  is  some- 
times possible  to  relate  lack  of  success  to  in- 
adequate training  as  well  as  to  the  other  sources 
of  ineptitude.  This  is  especially  apparent  where 
the  child  has  been  removed  from  his  village 
during  the  crucial  years,  or  where  the  child  has 
been  raised  by  a grandmother  or  other  non- 
hunter who  was  not  able  to  provide  the  neces- 
sary tuition. 

A general  statement  embracing  the  styles, 
modes,  and  mechanisms  of  neurological  pat- 
terning in  childhood  has  been  provided  by 
Gajdusek : 

Phylogeny  has  already  patterned  the  view  of 
the  physical  world  which  a child  will  receive  in 
the  structure  of  the  sense  receptors:  eyes,  ears, 
nose,  taste  buds;  tactile,  temperature,  and  pain 
receptors;  and  proprioceptors.  The  cultural 
milieu,  however,  can  determine  the  schemata  of 
thought  and  the  modes  of  handling  of  these  sense 
perceptions  as  well  as  it  determines  the  quality 
and  quantity  in  which  they  impinge  upon  the 
infant  and  child.  There  is  a vast  number  of  neuro- 
logical functions  of  the  central  nervous  system 
which  different  cultures  have  programmed  in 
their  own  specific  ways  by  the  unique  environ- 
ment they  provide  for  the  growth  and  develop- 
ment of  their  children.  These  include  the  style  of 
neuromuscular  coordination  in  fine  and  gross 
movements,  even  at  the  level  of  speech  and  eye 
movements;  styles  of  posture,  gait,  stance,  climb- 
ing and  swimming,  etc. ; modes  of  nonverbal 
communication  including  gesture  and  dance; 
use  of  language,  at  times  polylinguality ; the  form 
of  the  body  image;  sense  of  time,  space,  rhythm, 
and  tone;  color  sense  and  acuity  of  smell  and 
taste,  hearing  and  vision;  conceptions  of  quantity 


306  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

and  number,  methods  of  counting  (some  non- 
verbal), and  processes  of  reconning  and  compu- 
tation; styles  of  symbolic  representation  in  play 
or  drawing;  patterns  of  sexual  responsiveness 
and  behavior;  mnemonic  mechanisms;  and  even 
methods  and  mechanisms  of  imagery  and 
imagination,  reverie,  trance,  and  dream  (1963, 
P-  56). 

It  is  useful  to  realize,  as  D.  A.  Hamburg  has 
noted  (1961,  p.  281)  that  even  the  autonomic 
nervous  system  is  not  autonomous  but  rather 
that  it  is  substantially  under  central  nervous 
control.  Unfortunately  we  do  not  have  the  full 
span  of  physiological  and  neurological  observa- 
tions on  a longitudinal,  or  cross-sectional,  series 
of  children  for  a single  hunting  community. 
However,  we  do  have  a body  of  observations, 
variously  rich  or  sparse,  on  comparatively  gross 
activities,  and  in  these  we  can  see  the  way  in 
which  children  are  progressively  trained  to 
become  active  hunters.  We  can  see  the  end 
products,  the  overt  manifestations  of  deeper 
and  more  subtle  maturational  alterations  of 
the  nervous  system.  Our  major  problem  here 
is  to  determine  what  programming,  what  child- 
hood instruction,  is  essential  and  indispensable 
to  subsequent  hunting  behaviors. 

In  any  community  of  hunters  it  is  possible 
to  find  general  exercises  that  prepare  the  child 
for  active  hunting  but  many  fewer  that  involve 
a specific  commitment.  Probably  all  forms  of 
exercise  are  of  some  value,  but  only  a few  have 
demonstrable  relevance  in  the  sense  that  they 
are  a necessary  and  specific  prerequisite.  Be- 
ginning with  the  different  practices  for  the 
two  sexes  which  are  maximized  in  hunting 
groups,  a series  can  be  assembled.  Thus,  those 
practices  leading  to  use  of  spear  throwers, 
boomerangs,  bows  and  arrows,  lances,  boat 
handling,  sledding,  harpooning,  etc.,  are  ordi- 
narily restricted  to  males  or  males  are  clearly 
favored  in  systematic  instruction.  Neverthe- 
less, there  is  little  data  bearing  on  the  question 
of  how  much  instruction  is  necessary  in  child- 
hood. The  best  preparation  for  throwing  a 
spear  as  an  adult  hunter  is  probably  throwing 
one  at  an  earlier  age,  but  how  early  or  how 
many  practice  hours  are  required  is  not  amen- 
able to  quantified  estimate.  The  bow  and 
arrow  is  in  common  use  among  many  hunters 
— Pygmies,  Bushmen,  Eskimos,  various  Ameri- 


can Indians,  Andamanese,  Chukchee,  to  name 
only  enough  to  illustrate  considerable  diversity 
in  the  technology  and  use,  however,  most  ob- 
servers agree  that  these  hunters  are  mediocre 
or  indifferent  as  archers.  They  hunt  effectively 
with  their  equipment,  but,  they  compensate 
for  lack  of  accuracy  at  appreciable  distances, 
perhaps  more  than  twenty  or  thirty  yards,  by 
spending  their  time  getting  closer  to  theanimal. 
In  brief,  these  hunters  clearly  spend  more  time 
and  attention  in  utilization  of  their  knowledge 
of  animal  behavior  than  in  improvement  of 
their  equipment  or  of  its  use.  This  generaliza- 
tion, if  well  founded,  probably  constitutes  an 
important  aspect  of  primitive  hunting  and 
provides  a scale  for  comparisons  between 
groups. 

Children  were  taught  to  close  the  distance 
between  themselves  and  their  quarry  by  sophis- 
ticated stalking  methods  that  depended  more 
upon  comprehensive  observation,  detailed 
ethological  knowledge  and  an  equally  detailed 
system  of  interpretation  and  action,  than  upon 
the  improvement  of  their  equipment  and  the 
addition  of  ten  or  twenty  yards  to  its  effective 
range.  In  fact,  one  may  pass  from  this  generali- 
zation to  another  and  suggest  that  the  very  slow 
improvement  in  technology,  clubs,  spears, 
throwing  boards,  bows  and  arrows,  as  indi- 
cated by  the  archeological  record,  was  contin- 
gent upon  success  in  learning  animal  behavior. 
It  was  easier  or  more  effective  to  instruct 
children  in  ethology,  to  take  up  the  slack  by 
minimizing  their  distance  from  the  animal 
prey,  than  to  invest  heavily  in  equipment 
improvement.  The  rapid  advances  in  archery 
of  the  last  fifteen  years  reflect  an  application 
of  technological  methods  to  archery  equipment 
that  clearly  did  not  arise  from  a need  to 
depend  upon  such  equipment  for  any  impor- 
tant portion  of  the  annual  food  supply. 

The  difference  between  specifically  pro- 
grammed and  generally  programmed  pre- 
requisite childhood  exercises  for  hunting  in 
adulthood  is  epitomized  in  the  tendon  lengthen- 
ing exercises  for  Aleut  children,  designed  for 
hunting  from  the  kayak,  contrasted  with  their 
general  exercises.  These  former  focused  on  the 
shoulder  joint  of  the  throwing  arm,  on  the  low 
back,  and  on  the  posterior  region  of  the  knee 
joint. 

Very  early  in  childhood,  apparently  as  early 


Laughlin  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance 


as  beginning  to  walk,  the  male  child  was  placed 
in  a sitting  position  on  a flat  surface  or  on  a 
stool  with  his  heels  on  another  stool  or  box. 
His  preceptor,  a father,  uncle,  or  grandfather, 
stood  behind  or  to  the  side  of  him  and  pulled 
his  throwing  arm  up  and  over  behind  his  back. 
This  was  done  gently  and  intermittently,  often 
with  a little  song  or  rhythmic  susurration,  so 
that  several  excursions  were  made  rather  than 
one  prolonged  excursion.  This  exercise  created 
greater  mobility  at  the  shoulder  joint  and 
specifically  enabled  the  arm  to  move  farther 
backward  and  to  come  directly  forward  in  a 
flat,  vertical  plane.  As  a consequence,  the  arm 
functioned  as  a longer  lever  than  in  those  per- 
sons who  cannot  rotate  their  arm  backward 
without  moving  it  progressively  to  the  side  of 
l he  body  at  the  same  time.  A spear  or  harpoon 
could  be  thrown  farther,  more  easily,  and  from 
a greater  variety  of  positions  available  to  the 
seated  kayak  hunter. 

The  second  and  related  exercise  stretched 
the  tendons  and  ligaments  of  the  low  back. 
The  seated  child,  legs  extended  in  front,  was 
pushed  forward  by  a hand  applied  to  the  back. 
This  exercise  specifically  anticipated  the  con- 
siderable strain  placed  on  the  low  back  while 
paddling  or  throwing  when  seated  in  a kayak. 

The  third  exercise  of  this  series  consisted 
of  depressing  the  knees  of  the  seated  child 
so  that  the  tendons  on  the  posterior  of  the 
leg,  especially  the  semimembranosus  and 
the  semitendinosus  tendons  in  particular,  were 
stretched.  As  a consequence  the  person  was 
enabled  to  sit  with  legs  extended  for  long 
periods  of  time  and  to  operate  efficiently. 

These  three  specific  exercises  were  reinforced 
with  various  games.  In  one,  the  child  sat  on 
the  ground,  legs  extended,  and  threw  a dart 
at  a small  wooden  model  of  a whale  suspended 
from  a flexible  withe.  Two  boys  played  this 
game,  each  facing  the  other  and  with  his  own 
whale  target. 

An  example  of  a non-specific  exercise  of 
general  value  to  a kayak  hunter  but  with  no 
specific  relevance  to  kayak  hunting,  is  that  of 
finger-hanging.  The  young  child  was  sus- 
pended from  a ceiling  beam  of  the  house  by 
his  fingers.  His  preceptor  then  withdrew  and 
the  child  hung  until  he  was  forced  to  drop.  He 
dropped  to  the  floor,  an  earth  floor  covered 
with  dried  grass.  The  exercise  was  intended  to 


307 

strengthen  the  fingers  and  to  teach  the  child 
to  fall  on  his  feet  with  ease  and  agility. 

The  peculiar  monopoly  which  the  Aleuts 
and  Koniags  held  on  sea-otter  hunting  and 
the  corollary  fact  that  no  European  ever  be- 
came a successful  kayak  sea-otter  hunter,  may 
be  traced  in  part  to  their  childhood  training, 
both  the  physical  and  the  behavioral  aspect. 
Many  Europeans  have  learned  to  paddle 
kayaks,  and  many  have  learned  to  hunt  sea 
mammals,  but  extremely  few,  possibly  five, 
ever  became  kayak  hunters.  Aleuts  and 
Koniags  were  transported  from  their  home- 
land to  alien  waters  off  California  and  Japan 
by  their  Russian  administrators,  because  of 
their  non-duplicable  skills  in  sea-otter  hunting. 
The  point  in  citing  this  well-known  history  is 
that  it  reflects  some  of  the  consequences  of  a 
complex  hunting  achievement  which  is  de- 
monstrably and  specifically  related  to  child- 
hood training.  While  kayak  hunting  repre- 
sents a rare  technological  achievement,  the 
use  of  the  throwing  board  enjoyed  a much 
wider  distribution  about  the  world.  Certainly 
one  factor  in  the  failure  of  the  throwing  board 
to  diffuse  from  Eskimos  to  contiguous  groups 
of  Indians  is  that  an  essential  portion  of  the 
complex  rested  in  child  training  practices.  It 
was  not  a trait,  like  the  axe,  the  bow  and  arrow, 
or  the  rifle,  which  could  be  easily  used  by 
adults. 

A fear  of  kayaks,  as  found  among  the  Eski- 
mos of  Wainwright  (Nelson,  in  press),  must 
be  distinguished  from  the  relatively  localized 
“kayak  fear”  found  in  west  Greenland.  The 
possible  relationship  of  the  disease,  “kayak 
fear,”  to  inadequate  child  training  has  not 
been  explored.  The  inability  of  adult  hunters 
to  perform  normally  is  a generic  category  for 
investigation  and  might  well  be  especially  re- 
warding in  revealing  defects  in  childhood 
programming. 

Scanning 

Scanning  includes  the  collection  of  information 
on  where  to  hunt,  what  to  hunt,  and  the 
scheduling  of  a hunt.  The  choice  of  animals 
to  be  hunted  and  the  areas  which  will  be 
searched  reflect  sophisticated  knowledge  con- 
cerning the  behavior  of  animals,  environ- 
mental conditions,  and  other  commitments  of 


308  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

the  hunter  to  partners  or  to  the  portion  of  the 
community  which  depends  upon  him.  His  need 
for  food  and  fabricational  materials  may  out- 
weigh several  other  considerations.  The  inde- 
pendence of  scanning  and  its  role  may  be  seen 
in  the  common  practices  conducted  prior  to 
the  pursuit  or  stalking  of  detected  animals. 

For  several  days  prior  to  the  actual  detection 
and  pursuit  of  an  animal  or  herd  the  hunter 
may  search  an  area  for  signs.  Frequently  he 
gets  this  information  from  other  hunters.  He 
must  first  find  what  animals  are  in  the  territory 
and  the  actual  tracks,  feces,  and  browsed  plants 
may  provide  him  with  the  information  he 
needs.  The  presence  of  one  animal  may  signal 
the  presence  of  another  so  that  the  hunter  is 
encouraged  to  continue  with  this  inspection 
even  if  he  has  not  actually  sighted  the  animal 
he  wants.  He  may  sight  the  animal,  or  a herd, 
but  wait  for  it  to  move  into  a better  position, 
perhaps  closer  to  camp  or  in  a valley  where 
more  can  be  killed  than  in  the  open. 

In  scanning,  the  knowledge  of  tracks  and 
indications  of  animals  generally  is  the  para- 
mount feature  and  obviously  the  complex 
which  utilizes  previously  learned  observational 
information  concerning  animal  behavior.  The 
time  invested  in  this  portion  of  the  hunting 
sequence  is  usually  far  greater  than  for  any 
other  portion  except  for  the  childhood  pro- 
gramming. 

The  scanning  and  identification  problem  is 
quite  different  for  the  marine  mammal  hunter. 
He  must  proceed  to  the  most  likely  area  and 
then  search  for  the  interrupting  profile  of  the 
mammal  when  it  comes  to  that  horizon 
(Laughlin,  1967).  He  may  first  proceed  to  a 
mummy  cave  and  ask  for  help  from  the  hunters 
interred  there  who  still  maintain  an  active  part 
in  the  affairs  of  living  people,  and  he  certainly 
utilizes  the  information  provided  by  watchmen, 
those  who  sit  on  vantage  points  and  scan  the 
sea,  and  upon  the  weather  prognosticators.  A 
man  of  meteorological  sophistication,  an 
“astronome”  may  even  be  included  in  a party 
of  kayak  hunters  (Heizer,  i960,  p.  133). 

Choices  of  hunting  routes  may  involve 
various  sorts  of  divining,  whose  effect  is  to 
randomize  the  routes  or  areas  searched.  This 
is  based  on  the  fact,  well  known  to  the  primi- 
tive hunter,  that  animals  learn  the  habits  of 
humans  and  adjust  their  behavior  accordingly. 


The  religious  elements  which  pervade  the 
preparation  are  multitudinous  and  need  only 
be  called  to  mind  here.  Cleansing  rites  and 
special  clothing  are  ubiquitous.  They  impor- 
tantly reflect  the  reciprocal  nature  of  the  inter- 
action between  those  beings  in  the  animal 
world  and  those  in  the  human,  or  stated  less 
egocentrically,  the  contingent  relations  be- 
tween animal  beings  and  human  beings 
(Marsh,  1954;  Hallowed,  i960). 

Stalking 

Stalking  and  pursuit  of  game  ordinarily  begins 
once  the  animal  has  been  sighted.  Attention 
then  shifts  to  getting  as  close  to  the  animal  as 
necessary  for  an  effective  shot.  In  much  of 
hunting,  however,  there  is  no  sharp  line  of 
demarcation  between  these  two  portions  of  the 
sequence  pattern.  The  hunter  may  commit 
himself  to  a particular  animal  or  herd  without 
having  actually  seen  it.  There  may  be  ample 
evidence  that  a particular  animal  is  being 
followed,  and  the  animal  may  be  aware  of  the 
pursuit  without  an  actual  visual  sighting.  The 
hunter  and  the  hunted  may  smell  each  other, 
they  may  hear  each  other,  they  may  see  each 
other’s  tracks,  and  the  animal  may  actually  be 
attracted  to  its  human  pursuer  by  his  urine. 
Following  a polar  bear  for  one  or  two  days, 
running  down  a horse  over  a three-day  period, 
and  certainly  some  of  the  desert  hunting  in 
Australia  and  in  the  Kalahari  involves  a long 
pursuit  and  relatively  short  period  for  killing. 

The  hunter  is  concerned  with  the  freshness 
of  the  track  and  the  direction  in  which  he  is 
moving.  He  wants  all  possible  information  on 
his  quarry’s  condition;  its  age,  sex,  size,  rate 
of  travel,  and  a working  estimate  of  the  dis- 
tance by  which  the  animal  leads  him.  In  the 
final  stages,  when  he  is  closing  with  the  animal, 
the  hunter  employs  his  knowledge  of  animal 
behavior  and  situational  factors  relevant  to 
that  behavior  in  a crucial  fashion.  For  all 
birds,  animals,  and  fish  the  hunter  must  esti- 
mate flight  distance,  the  point  at  which  they 
will  take  flight  or  run  away.  Conversely,  with 
animals  that  are  aggressive,  he  needs  to  inter- 
pret any  signs,  raising  or  lowering  of  tail, 
flexing  of  muscles,  blowing,  or  salivation,  etc., 
that  indicate  an  attack  rather  than  a flight. 
In  many  cases  the  animal  is  intentionally 


Laughlin  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance 


provoked  to  attack.  The  variations  are 
innumerable. 

One  useful  generalization  of  the  problem 
faced  by  the  hunter  is  that  he  wants  to  get  as 
close  as  possible  for  the  best  possible  shot  but 
he  would  rather  have  a poor  shot  than  none  at 
all.  'file  enormous  labor  and  skill  that  is  ex- 
pended in  approaching  the  animal,  often  hours 
of  lying  on  the  ground  waiting  for  a change  in 
direction  of  wind  or  in  the  position  of  the 
animal,  testifies  to  the  crucial  importance  of 
stalking. 

The  technological  equipment  of  most  primi- 
tive hunters  is  such  that  their  quarry  is  usually 
shot  at  relatively  short  distances,  usually  less 
than  thirty  feet  for  harpoons,  bows  and  arrows, 
and  spears.  Even  the  one  generalization  about 
the  minimum  distance  for  the  best  shot  must 
be  qualified  because  the  hunter  may  want  the 
maximum  distance  compatible  with  his  wea- 
pon, in  order  to  provide  time  for  a second  shot. 
Some  animals  tend  to  continue  in  the  direction 
they  were  traveling  after  they  are  shot.  Other 
animals  have  a tendency  to  simply  stand  and 
bleed,  if  not  frightened  by  sight  or  smell  of  the 
hunter.  The  point  here  is  simply  that  the 
enormous  range  and  complexities  of  animal 
behavior;  the  influence  of  situational  factors 
depending  upon  time  of  day,  sex,  age,  nutri- 
tional state,  degree  of  excitation,  being  in  the 
company  of  a mate,  with  or  without  young, 
etc.,  these  factors  must  all  be  read  into  the 
decision-making  machinery  of  the  hunter. 

Hunting  with  high-powered  rifles  and  tele- 
scopic sights,  and  to  a lesser  extent  with  modern 
archery  equipment,  is  substantially  different 
from  the  hunting  of  primitive  man.  In  a general 
fashion,  the  better  the  technological  equipment 
the  less  intimate  knowledge  of  animal  behavior 
is  required.  Getting  close  to  an  animal  repre- 
sents the  major  investment  of  the  primitive 
hunter  and  explains  the  extensive  attention 
given  to  childhood  programming  and  to  the 
location  of  game. 

Immobilization,  Killing,  and  Capture 

The  vast  majority  of  animals  taken  by  primi- 
tive hunters  are  not  killed  outright  or  are  not 
killed  upon  initial  contact.  More  often  they 
are  wounded,  stunned,  or  immobilized  to  a 
degree  that  renders  them  incapable  of  rapid  or 


309 

prolonged  flight.  Even  with  the  use  of  poisons 
the  larger  mammals  may  live  on,  traveling 
slowly,  for  one  or  more  days.  The  Pygmy  ele- 
phant hunter  does  not  expect  his  quarry  to  fall 
over  immediately  after  the  first  puncture,  but 
he  does  expect  to  be  able  to  induce  hemor- 
rhaging that  will  impair  the  functioning  of  the 
elephant  and  simplify  tracking.  In  other  cases 
the  hunter  intentionally  avoids  killing  the 
animal  for  very  practical  reasons.  An  Eskimo 
may  wound  a bear  and  then  drive  him  down 
to  a stream  where  he  can  be  killed  and  boated 
home.  If  inland  on  a small  island,  the  Eskimo 
may  wound  the  bear  and  walk  him  over  to  the 
edge  of  the  island,  then  dispatch  him  and  roll 
him  into  the  sea  where  he  can  be  floated  and 
towed  away.  In  many  such  cases  it  is.  practical 
and  highly  desirable  to  save  an  enormous 
amount  of  labor,  the  backpacking  of  some 
1,200  pounds  through  difficult  country,  by 
wounding  the  animal  and  heading  him  in  the 
preferred  direction. 

Capture  of  animals  may  be  an  objective  and 
done  for  many  different  reasons.  One  impor- 
tant reason  is  the  need  to  secure  living  specimens 
for  study  and  child  instruction,  commonly 
categorized  as  “pets”  in  the  literature.  Live 
animals  may  be  desired  for  decoys,  and  of 
course  live  animals  may  be  used  for  various 
ritual  purposes.  Birds  may  be  taken  for  training 
in  hunting  or  fishing  (cormorants,  falcons,  etc.), 
or  simply  kept  as  a source  of  feathers.  From  the 
enormous  range  of  methods  of  taking  the 
quarry  it  is  obvious  that  immediate  and  out- 
right killing  is  only  one  of  many  variations. 
The  extensive  use  of  snares,  traps,  and  pitfalls 
in  itself  testifies  to  the  concern  with  capture 
rather  than  immediate  killing. 

Retrieval 

Retrieval  of  game  represents  the  end  point  of 
the  hunting  complex  pattern,  it  is  the  object 
of  those  things  which  have  preceded  it.  Within 
the  retrieval  complex  are  included  the  im- 
mediate details  of  retrieving  a floating  seal  or 
walrus,  and  of  getting  it  secured  to  the  kayak, 
or  to  an  umiak,  or  an  ice  cake  so  that  it  can 
be  cut  up.  Many  items  of  material  culture 
naturally  fall  in  here  and  retrieving  hooks  for 
securing  floating  animals  before  they  sink  are 
prominent  among  them.  This  complex  category 


3 1 o Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

broadens  out  to  include  the  dressing  and 
preparation  of  the  animal  for  return  to  the 
camp  or  village.  Finally,  the  activities  involved 
in  this  complex  extend  ultimately  to  the  dis- 
tribution and  use  of  the  game,  and  ultimately 
the  return  of  some  of  the  materials  back  into 
earlier  portions  of  the  sequence  system.  A flow 


The  intellectual  requirements  for  appro- 
priate behavior  in  this  portion  of  the  system 
still  depend  in  part  upon  those  that  were  pre- 
requisite to  the  preceding  four  portions.  How- 
ever, there  is  a qualitative  difference.  An 
animal  must  be  expertly  drawn  in  accordance 
with  the  anatomy  of  the  animal,  the  various 


PROCESS  OF  HUNTING 


"P.t.“  D*coy»  MauHoIr0'  | 

FEEDBACK 

1 1 LJ 1 1 

SEQUENCE 

PATTERN 

▼ — 

PROGRAM 

Observation 
Factual 
Information 
Interpretive 
Action  Systems 

SCAN 

't 

STALK 

If 

IMMOBILIZE 

Kill 

Capture 

— 1 

RETRIEVE 

I 

INFORMATIONAL 

COHERENCE 

Knowledge  of  Animal  Behavior 

Knowledge  of 
dietary  and 
fabricational 
usee  and  trans- 
port logistics 

TEMPORAL 

COHERENCE 

Childhood 

Adult 

(few  days  epon) 

Figure  i . The  Process  of  Hunting. 


chart  shows  the  routes  by  which  some  of  the 
materials  return  to  participate  again  in  the 
system  (Fig.  i).  The  most  obvious  is  the  capture 
of  an  animal  to  be  used  for  instruction  of  chil- 
dren in  animal  behavior.  Thus,  the  entire  system 
is  activated  in  proper  sequence  and  reverts  to 
flow  again  into  the  system. 


fabricational  and  nutritional  uses  of  the  animal, 
with  attention  to  size  requirements  that  affect 
carrying  it  back  to  the  camp,  and  to  social 
factors  such  as  some  desired  portions,  horns,  tail, 
forward  flipper,  or  fluke  meat,  for  persons  of 
relevant  status.  Attention  shifts  over  to  anatomy 
rather  than  behavior,  to  material  characteristics, 


Laughlin  Hunting : An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance 


to  the  fabricational  and  dietary  qualities 
of  the  animal.  Some  portions  may  be  eaten 
immediately,  and  some  may  be  employed  in  a 
ritual  observance  to  insure  affability  of  the 
animal  spirit.  Hides  are  carefully  removed  if 
they  are  intended  for  fabricational  use  and 
their  cutting  is  in  accord  with  a particular  use. 
Thus,  if  a sealskin  is  to  be  used  for  a line,  it 
must  be  slipped,  in  tubular  fashion,  off  the 
carcass  so  that  a continuous,  circumferentially 
spiral  line  can  be  cut.  But  if  the  seal  is  to  be  fed 
to  dogs,  or  its  skin  to  be  used  for  clothing,  or 
both,  it  is  drawn  quite  differently.  A worldwide 
survey  indicates  great  differences  in  the  utiliza- 
tion of  animal  tissues.  Some  people  use  the  in- 
testines and  pericardium,  others  discard  them 
or  feed  them  to  dogs  (Table  i).  The  same 
animal  has  different  meanings  for  different 
peoples  and  this  extends  far  beyond  its  rank 
order  in  their  list  of  food  preferences. 

Women  and  dogs  have  been  the  principal 
beasts  of  burden  since  Paleolithic  times  and 
these  are  not  universally  available  for  the 
reason  that  women  are  not  always  at  the  site 
of  killing  and  butchering,  and  many  people 
did  not  breed  dogs  suitable  for  packing.  Where 
long  distances  and  large  amounts  of  meat  are 
involved,  a village  may  move  to  the  animal. 
Elephants  and  whales,  unless  juvenile  or  easily 
floated,  usually  become  community  projects. 
It  is  interesting  that,  excepting  the  sled  and  dog 
traction,  both  comparatively  recent,  the  only 


3ii 

mechanical  advantage  accessible  to  primitive 
man  was  water  transport.  The  retrieval  flow 
pattern  for  the  Eskimo  or  Aleut  who  harpoons 
a seal,  tows  it  home  behind  his  kayak,  and  eats 
all  the  meat,  contrasted  with  the  sledging 
Eskimo  who  harpoons  a seal,  carries  it  home 
on  a sled,  and  then  shares  it  with  the  dogs,  is 
enormous. 

The  kayak-hunter  can  tow  much  greater 
weights  more  easily,  than  can  the  sledgers.  The 
kayak-hunter  can  use  the  hide  of  his  quarry  to 
make  the  kayak  with  which  he  hunts  the  beast. 
Marine  hunters  use  more  of  the  products  of  the 
animals  they  hunt  than  do  terrestrial  hunters, 
and  they  use  them  more  advantageously.  Eso- 
phagus, intestines,  and  pericardia  are  of  little 
use  to  most  hunting  groups  as  fabricational 
materials,  yet  they  account  for  an  appreciable 
part  of  the  clothing  of  some  northern  peoples. 

The  Physical  Superiorities  of  Man 

Pound  for  pound,  man  is  a tough,  durable, 
strong,  and  versatile  animal.  To  the  extent  that 
comparisons  between  species  have  validity,  he 
is  superior  in  overall  physical  performance  to 
all  or  most  other  mammals.  This  physical  super- 
iority is  intimately  related  to  his  hunting  habit. 

It  has  become  a common  routine  to  observe 
that  man  is  born  helpless  and  remains  depend- 
dent  upon  others  for  a long  period  of  time,  that 


Table  1 

Multiple  Use  of  Resources 

Part  of  Animal 

(Eumetopia  jubata  [. Northern  or  S teller  sea  lion]) 

Partial  List  of  Uses 

1. 

Hide 

Cover  for  kayak  and  umiak;  line  for  harpoon 

2. 

Flesh 

Food,  for  humans 

3- 

Blubber 

Food:  eaten  with  meat,  rendered  for  oil 

4. 

Organs  (heart,  liver,  spleen,  kidney) 

Food 

5- 

Bones 

Ribs  for  root  diggers,  humerus  for  club,  baculum  for  flaker 

6. 

Teeth 

Decorative  pendants 

7- 

Whiskers 

Decoration  of  wood  hunting  hats  and  visors 

8. 

Sinew 

Back  sinews  used  for  sewing,  lashing,  cordage  (less  desirable  than 

9- 

Flippers 

sinew  of  whale  or  caribou) 

Soles  used  for  boot  soles;  contents  gelatinized  in  flipper  and  eaten 

IO. 

Pericardium 

Water  bottle,  general-purpose  container 

11. 

Esophagus 

Parka,  pants,  leggings  of  boots,  pouches 

12. 

Stomach 

Storage  container  (especially  for  dried  salmon) 

'3- 

Intestines 

Parka,  pants,  pouches 

312  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

he  is  a generalized  animal  lacking  the  speciali- 
zations that  characterize  other  species,  and 
this  recitation  often  leads  to  the  observation 
that  man  is  physically  weak  and  defenseless 
because  he  is  dependent  upon  culture.  This  in 
turn  provides  the  argument  for  the  implication 
that  evolution  took  place  in  the  past  and  that 
the  rapidity  and  pervasiveness  of  cultural 
evolution  has  supplanted  physical  evolution. 
A more  realistic  and  holistic  view  is  the  recog- 
nition of  the  biobehavioral  continuum  that 
characterizes  the  development  of  each  indivi- 
dual (Ginsburg  and  Laughlin,  1966).  The 
dichotomy  between  biology  and  culture,  be- 
tween cultural  learning  and  its  neurological 
base,  has  been  historically  conducive  to  the 
denigration  of  man’s  physical  abilities. 

In  fact,  human  beings  are  remarkably  versa- 
tile, durable,  and  strong  in  their  physical  con- 
stitution. As  Haldane  has  observed,  only  man 
can  swim  a mile,  walk  twenty  miles,  and  then 
climb  a tree  (Haldane,  1956,  p.  5).  The  full 
list  of  man’s  physical  superiorities,  when  com- 
pared with  other  mammals,  must  include  his 
ability  to  run  rapidly  and  to  run  long  distances. 
One  need  only  cite  the  conquest  of  the  four- 
minute  mile  and  the  long-distance  running  of 
various  Indian  tribes.  Tarahumara  endurance 
runners  have  been  scientifically  studied  and  the 
results  confirm  and  extend  various  anecdotal 
accounts.  Participants  in  kick-ball  races  may 
cover  up  to  100  miles  in  24  hours  (Balke  and 
Snow,  1965).  That  Indians  can  run  down 
horses  and  deer  is  well  known,  by  pacing  the 
animal,  keeping  him  moving,  and  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  tendency  of  many  ungulates  to 
move  in  an  arc  by  traversing  the  chord.  The 
Indian  hunter  who  is  running  down  an  animal 
makes  use  of  his  own  physical  superiority  and 
his  knowledge  of  the  animal’s  behavior. 

In  pulling  strength,  humans  compare  favor- 
ably with  adult  chimpanzees.  In  ability  to 
carry  loads,  humans  regularly  display  abilities 
superior  to  the  donkey,  and  this  superiority  is 
demonstrated  at  high  altitudes  as  well.  Loads 
of  sixty  pounds  are  commonly  carried  and  the 
literature  abounds  with  examples  of  porters 
carrying  loads  in  excess  of  their  own  body 
weight. 

Functional  flexibility  permitting  a wide 
range  of  movements  and  postures,  best  seen  in 
young  children,  acrobats,  gymnasts,  ballet 


dancers,  wrestlers,  swimmers,  and  divers,  is 
unequivocally  superior  to  other  mammals.  The 
closest  approach  to  human  flexibility  as  a 
whole  is  probably  found  in  the  orangutan  and 
in  the  spider  monkeys,  the  latter  having  the 
advantage  of  a prehensile  tail.  However,  these 
contenders  are  lacking  in  the  fine  motor  control 
of  the  hand  and  of  a specialized  foot.  Nor  can 
they  swivel  their  heads  as  far  or  as  easily  as 
humans.  They  do  not  have  the  ability  to  milk 
a cow,  a manual  feat  requiring  a subtle  suc- 
cession of  digital  closure,  and  as  runners  or 
weight  bearers  they  cannot  even  be  entered  in 
the  lists. 

Man’s  sensory  apparatus  is  excellent.  His 
vision  is  acute  and  of  course  includes  color 
vision.  It  is  exceeded  only  by  that  of  various 
birds.  His  auditory  acuity  compares  well  with 
other  animals  and  is  a prime  factor  in  his 
hunting  abilities.  His  olfactory  abilities  do 
appear  to  be  more  limited  than  those  of  some 
other  species,  polar  bears  for  example,  but  it 
is  adequate  to  facilitate  hunting.  The  external 
integument  of  humans  is  remarkably  tough. 
Many  groups  live  their  entire  lives  without 
benefit  of  clothes  and  this  includes  groups  living 
in  areas  as  stressful  and  divergent  as  Australia, 
Tierra  del  Fuego,  the  Congo,  and  the  Kalahari 
Desert.  The  fallacious  idea  that  man  lost  his 
body  hair  as  a consequence  of  wearing  clothes, 
still  recited  as  a demonstrated  fact  (Glass,  1965, 
p.  1254),  is  easily  disposed  of  by  the  examples 
of  hirsute  and  naked  hunters,  the  Australian 
aborigines,  and  of  glabrous  and  naked  hunters, 
the  Bushmen.  Human  skin  tans  well  and  is  far 
more  durable  than  that  of  many  other  mam- 
mals. One  may  speculate  on  the  role  hair  has 
played  in  human  evolution,  but  a tough  skin 
has  been  a distinct  advantage  in  a large  variety 
of  recurrent  situations  to  the  primitive  hunter. 

Considerable  physiological  tolerance,  an  un- 
surpassed ability  to  adapt  to  environmental 
stresses  of  which  high  altitude  is  most  promi- 
nent, is  surely  one  of  man’s  major  physical 
superiorities.  Few  animals,  rats  and  dogs, 
to  cite  undomesticated  and  domesticated 
examples,  compare  with  humans  in  this  res- 
pect. A review  of  all  the  areas  in  which  mem- 
bers of  our  species  live  serves  to  indicate  our 
great  physiological  plasticity.  No  other  single 
species  lives  at  high  and  low  altitudes,  extremely 
hot  and  extremely  cold  climates  and  in  all  the 


Laughlin  Hunting : An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance  313 


combinations  of  humidity,  light  and  darkness 
that  compose  the  panel  of  human  habitats. 

Among  the  many  other  superiorities  en- 
joyed by  the  human  animal  is  a dental  and 
alimentary  system  that  permits  a truly  omni- 
vorous diet.  Humans  can  tolerate  a large  num- 
ber of  plants  and  animals  and  can  adapt  to 
diets  that  are  composed  totally  of  flesh  or  of 
plant  foods.  Additionally,  they  can  continue 
work  under  conditions  of  deprivation. 

When  the  superior  memory  and  learning 
abilities  of  man  is  included,  and  the  use  of 
tools,  language,  and  other  elements  of  the  bio- 
behavioral  matrix  in  which  man  operates,  the 
remarkable  versatility  of  the  human  animal 
becomes  even  more  apparent.  However,  this 
should  not  obscure  the  basic  fact  that  viewed 
solely  from  the  standpoint  of  anatomy,  physio- 
logy, and  neurology  man  enjoys  many  superior- 
ities compared  with  other  species.  A man  can 
run  down  a horse  in  two  or  three  days,  and 
then  decide  whether  to  eat  it,  ride  it,  pull  a 
load  with  it,  wear  it,  or  worship  it. 

Simplicity  of  Basic  Technology 

The  common  weapons  and  related  devices  used 
in  stalking  and  in  the  immobilization  of  game 
animals  is  basically  simple  and  elementary. 
Over  the  million  or  more  years  in  which  man 
has  evolved  as  a hunter,  it  is  probable  that  the 
vast  majority  of  mammals,  birds,  and  fish  have 
been  killed  with  clubs,  stones,  knives,  and 
spears  or  simply  strangled  with  the  hands  or 
in  a snare  or  noose.  Examination  of  the  archeo- 
logical record,  even  that  of  Upper  Paleolithic 
big-game  hunters,  is  not  impressive  except  in 
virtuosity  of  flaking  or  in  other  artistic  varia- 
tions. Diagonal  flaking  of  a spear  point  has  no 
demonstrable  advantage  over  parallel  flaking, 
and  fluting  offers  no  discernible  advantage  over 
unfluted  points. 

As  Boas  observed,  “As  soon  as  a reasonably 
long  shaft  allowed  an  attack  from  a point  be- 
yond the  reach  of  the  teeth  and  paws  of  the 
animal,  hunting  became  safer”  (Boas,  1938, 
p.  254).  The  spear,  used  as  a lance  or  cast,  was 
certainly  a major  step  forward,  and  has  per- 
sisted for  some  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  basically  a simple  invention, 
and  the  spear-thrower,  still  in  use  by  some 


Eskimos  and  Australian  aborigines,  is  similarly 
an  uncomplicated  device;  The  bows  and  arrows 
in  use  by  most  primitive  hunters  were  not  im- 
pressive for  their  cast,  their  distance,  nor  their 
accuracy.  An  examination  of  the  variety  of 
arrow  releases  and  their  geographical  distribu- 
tion (Wissler,  1926,  pp.  30-40)  serves  to  rein- 
force the  idea  that  cultural  styles  in  the  con- 
struction and  use  of  various  tools  and  weapons 
have  only  limited  relevance  to  the  potential 
efficiency  of  the  weapon.  As  previously  sug- 
gested, the  enormous  variety  of  harpoon  heads 
that  have  been  used  to  harpoon  the  same 
species  of  seal,  or  the  variety  of  fishhooks  that 
are  used  to  catch  the  same  species  of  fish, 
illuminates  the  basic  fact  that  the  hunter  in- 
vests more  heavily  in  knowledge  of  the  behavior 
of  the  animals,  in  methods  for  approaching  them 
or  attracting  them  close  to  him,  than  in  increas- 
ing the  range  or  firepower  of  his  weapons. 

A substantial  amount  of  hunting  reveals  the 
way  in  which  animals  can  be  easily  approached 
under  suitable  conditions,  and  then  dispatched 
with  a club  or  a spear.  Many  animals  are  killed 
while  asleep.  Obviously  the  most  ferocious 
beast  in  the  world  is  utterly  harmless  while 
asleep,  or  hibernating.  Walrus,  who  are  often 
victors  in  combat  with  polar  and  brown  bears, 
are  frequently  taken  while  asleep.  Screening 
noises  are  prominently  utilized  in  many  forms 
of  hunting.  During  storms,  the  sea  otter  hauls 
up  on  shore.  The  Aleuts  approached  them  with 
ease  at  this  time  owing  to  the  animals’  inability 
to  hear  the  approaching  hunters,  and  simply 
clubbed  them  (Elliott,  1886,  pp.  142-43).  To  a 
significant  extent,  young  animals  fall  in  the 
same  accessible  category  as  sleeping  animals. 
The  archeological  and  ethnographic  record  is 
unambiguous  on  the  fact  that  the  vast  majority 
of  mammals  killed  are  immature  or  subadult. 
This  reflects  the  population  profile  of  many 
species,  but  it  also  represents  a preference  on 
the  part  of  the  hunter.  The  largest  and  oldest 
animals  are  more  difficult  to  kill  or  capture, 
they  do  not  taste  as  good  as  younger  ones,  their 
hides  are  often  scarred  and  therefore  less 
desirable  for  clothing,  and  they  may  even  be 
avoided  for  frankly  conservational  and  for 
religious  considerations. 

Driving  animals,  whether  into  a net,  a pit, 
over  a cliff,  or  within  range  of  concealed  hun- 
ters, is  again  obviously  simple  so  far  as  the 


314  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

technology  is  concerned,  but  considerably  more 
complex  with  reference  to  the  coordination 
required  of  the  persons  conducting  this  part  of 
the  hunt.  The  signalling  system  used  by  Aleut 
and  Koniag  kayak  hunters  when  employing  a 
surround  method  reflects  the  solution  of  a 
problem  in  communication  where  spoken 
language  would  frustrate  the  combined  efforts 
of  the  hunters.  The  position  of  the  paddle  of 
the  first  man  to  sight  the  quarry  provided 
ample  cues  to  the  other  hunters.  The  many 
ways  in  which  group  hunting  provided  an 
effective  means  of  scanning,  stalking,  and  kill- 
ing, and  at  the  same  time  placed  a premium 
upon  precisely  coordinated  social  organization, 
simultaneously  reveals  the  importance  of  alter- 
nate forms  of  communication  between  the 
participants.  Brief,  silent,  inconspicuous,  and 
unambiguous  cues  are  absolutely  necessary  in 
such  operations. 

Though  the  technological  sophistication  of 
many  poisons  is  considerably  advanced  be- 
yond the  handax  and  club,  the  use  of  poisons 
also  illustrates  the  point  that  much  program- 
ming must  precede  the  killing  complex  (Linne, 
1957).  The  development  of  effective  poisons 
importantly  demonstrates  the  basic  inventive- 
ness of  primitive  hunters. 

Among  the  great  inventory  of  hunting  tech- 
nology is  the  ancient  and  widespread  bolas.  Its 
principle,  common  to  the  bull-roarer  sling  and 
centrifuge  alike,  is  simple  enough  for  women 
and  children  to  manipulate  and  helps  explain 
some  of  their  substantial  contributions  to  the 
hunting  economy. 

The  point  of  drawing  attention  to  the  sim- 
plicity of  the  basic  technology  is  of  course  to 
draw  attention  to  the  sophistication  of  the 
complexes  preceding  the  actual  use  of  the 
weapons.  In  a very  real  sense  the  hunter  is 
taking  a final  examination  with  a mortal  de- 
merit for  failure.  It  is  the  preceding  period  of 
learning  that  enables  him  to  perform  ade- 
quately. 

Hunter’s 

Sophisticated  Knowledge 
of  Behavior  and  Anatomy 

There  is  ample  documentation,  though  sur- 
prisingly few  systematic  studies,  for  the  postu- 


late that  primitive  man  is  sophisticated  in  his 
knowledge  of  the  natural  world.  This  sophis- 
tication encompasses  the  entire  macroscopic 
zoological  world  of  mammals,  marsupials,  rep- 
tiles, birds,  fish,  insects,  and  plants.  Knowledge 
of  tides,  meteorological  phenomena  generally, 
astronomy,  and  other  aspects  of  the  natural 
world  are  also  well  developed  among  some 
primitive  peoples.  There  are  genuinely  large 
variations  between  groups  with  reference  to 
the  sophistication  and  extent  of  their  know- 
ledge, and  to  the  areas  in  which  they  have 
concentrated.  Empiricism  is  not  at  all  uncom- 
mon, and  inventiveness  similarly  recurs  in 
widely  separated  areas  with  only  remote  or  no 
discernible  historical  connections.  Having  pre- 
viously discussed  these  topics  (Laughlin,  1961, 
1963),  I will  here  only  cite  the  relevance  of  this 
sophistication  to  the  hunting  behavior  system 
and  to  its  significance  for  the  evolution  of 
man. 

Hunters  are  extremely  knowledgeable  con- 
cerning animal  behavior  and  anatomy  for  a 
variety  of  reasons.  Hunting  is  their  profession 
and  this  requires  such  knowledge.  They  recite 
events  of  hunting,  they  discuss  endlessly  the 
weather  and  its  effects  on  ice  conditions,  or  on 
the  moss  on  which  caribou  feed ; they  make 
predictions  on  the  numbers  of  various  animals 
based  on  weather  conditions  and  its  effects  on 
animals  and  plants  that  serve  as  food  for  carni- 
vores and  grazers.  Their  conversations  often 
sound  like  a classroom  discussion  of  ecology, 
of  food  chains,  and  trophic  levels. 

The  accuracy  of  their  information  is  attested 
by  their  success  in  hunting  and  by  comparisons 
with  scientific  studies  of  behavior  and  anatomy 
and  systematics.  In  discussing  the  species  con- 
cept of  the  local  naturalist,  Ernst  Mayr  includes 
the  opinion  of  primitive  natives: 

Some  30  years  ago  I spent  several  months  with 
a tribe  of  superb  woodsmen  and  hunters  in  the 
Arfak  Mountains  of  New  Guinea.  They  had  136 
different  vernacular  names  for  the  137  species  of 
birds  that  occurred  in  the  area,  confusing  only 
two  species.  It  is  not,  of  course,  pure  coincidence 
that  these  primitive  woodsmen  arrive  at  the  same 
conclusion  as  the  museum  taxonomists,  but  an 
indication  that  both  groups  of  observers  deal  with 
the  same  arbitrary  discontinuities  of  nature 
(1963.  P-  >7)- 


Laughlin  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance 


The  consultation  of  native  hunters  by 
naturalists  extends  well  back  into  the  nine- 
teenth century.  The  naturalist  Chamisso  who 
visited  Unalaska  as  early  as  1817  published  a 
detailed  study  of  whales  in  which  he  depended 
upon  the  local  Aleuts  who  carved  wooden 
models  of  each  of  the  whales  and  provided 
various  information  about  each  of  them 
(Chamisso,  1824). 

The  ubiquity  of  sophisticated  information 
among  hunters  is  probably  of  more  importance 
for  interpreting  the  development  and  conse- 
quences of  such  information  than  the  unusual 
and  rare  achievements  that  may  occasionally 
be  associated  with  such  knowledge.  The  pre- 
paration of  mummies  and  intentional  autopsy 
of  the  dead  to  find  out  why  they  died  are 
expectable  developments  where  there  is  the 
appropriate  context  and  concern. 

The  Tungus,  described  in  detail  by  Shiroko- 
gorov  (1935),  compare  favorably  with  Eskimos 
and  even  with  the  Aleuts  (Marsh  and  Laughlin, 
1956).  They  are  good  gross  anatomists,  their 
ideas  on  physiological  functions  are  based  on 
their  observations,  they  are  good  naturalists, 
and  they  are  concerned  to  acquaint  themselves 
with  the  behavior  and  the  anatomy  of  animals 
or  birds  not  well  known  to  them,  capturing  live 
specimens  for  this  specific  purpose  and  for  pets 
for  the  instruction  of  children.  “He  [theTungu] 
is  interested  in  the  comparative  study  of  bones 
and  soft  parts  of  the  body  and  he  comes  to  form 
a good  idea  as  to  the  anatomical  similarities 
and  dissimilarities  in  animals  and  even  man” 
(Shirokogorov,  1935,  p.  73). 

As  previously  indicated,  the  sources  of  Aleut 
anatomical  knowledge  can  be  partitioned  into 
five  categories:  (1)  the  study  of  anatomical 
structures;  (2)  a rational  medicine  and  physical 
culture;  (3)  dissection  of  human  bodies;  (4) 
true  comparative  anatomy,  focused  on  the  sea 
otter;  and  (5)  the  manufacture  of  dried  mum- 
mies (Laughlin,  1961,  pp.  157-60).  The  first, 
second,  and  fourth  categories  appear  most 
ubiquitous.  The  daily  butchering  and  drawing 
of  animals  leads  to  knowledge  about  them,  and 
to  the  extent  that  internal  tissues  are  used  for 
food  or  fabricational  purposes,  the  knowledge 
may  be  considerably  detailed.  Hunters  are  well 
aware  of  the  affinity  between  man  and  other 
animals,  and  they  all  have  relevant  exercises 
designed  to  condition  the  hunter.  A good  deal 


315 

of  information  inevitably  obtains  for  human 
biology  stemming  first  from  the  need  for  assis- 
tance or  intervention  at  birth. 

If  primitive  hunters  are  compared  with 
ethologists,  some  common  procedures  are  ob- 
vious, and  though  the  goals  may  rapidly  di- 
verge, they  are  neither  antipathetic  nor  wholly 
dissimilar.  Drawing  upon  an  important  posi- 
tion paper  of  the  ethologist,  G.  P.  Baerends, 
the  common  element  is  immediately  apparent. 
“Starting  from  detailed  description  of  be- 
haviour, ethologists  study  the  factors  that 
underlie  their  causation,  their  genetic  basis  and 
their  ontogeny”  (Baerends,  1958,  p.  466).  The 
Bushmen,  Pygmies,  or  Aleuts  have  the  detailed 
description  of  behavior  well  in  hand,  with  the 
emphasis  probably  on  motor  systems.  Their 
knowledge  of  physiology,  genetics,  and  allied 
disciplines  is  clearly  inadequate  to  sustain  their 
interests  in  causation.  To  my  knowledge,  no  one 
has  inquired  into  primitive  definitions  of  units 
of  behavior,  and  how  behavior  elements  enter 
into  their  taxonomic  groupings.  Such  studies 
could  only  be  conducted  among  hunters  who  are 
actively  engaged  in  hunting,  not  upon  reserva- 
tion natives  who  have  access  only  to  memory. 

Genetic  Mechanisms 
in  Hunting  Societies 

The  nature  of  the  hunting  behavior  system 
early  imposed  conditions  on  mating  behavior 
both  within  and  between  groups.  These  con- 
ditions have  had  important  influences  on  gene- 
tic mechanisms  at  any  given  time,  and  on 
trends  in  human  evolution  over  long  periods  of 
time  in  the  history  of  our  species.  In  succinct 
form,  the  most  salient  generalizations  applic- 
able to  contemporary  or  recent  hunting  societies 
with  a focus  on  big-game  hunting,  and  which 
can  be  extrapolated  into  earlier  times,  are 
these:  (1)  They  are  small  in  numbers,  with  low 
effective  population  size.  The  nature  of  a 
hunting  economy  does  not  ordinarily  permit 
the  aggregation  of  large  numbers  of  people  in 
one  place  at  one  time.  The  high  population 
density  of  marine  hunters  such  as  the  Eastern 
Aleuts  was  achieved  by  multiplication  of  the 
number  of  demes,  less  so  of  the  size  of  demes. 
Most  bands  tend  to  be  genetic  units,  with  the 
obvious  exception  of  Australian  bands  which 


3 1 6 Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

tend  to  be  exogamous,  in  which  case  the  tribal 
units  are  the  important  genetic  units.  (2)  Their 
populations  are  isolated  and  the  constituent 
demes  are  isolated  in  varying  degree,  the  ideal 
condition  for  maximum  evolutionary  oppor- 
tunity as  demonstrated  by  Sewall  Wright.  (3) 
The  inbreeding  effect  is  usually  present  and 
inbreeding  is  common.  This  may  contribute 
to  rapid  action  of  selection  by  increasing  the 
number  of  homozygotes  (that  would  otherwise 
be  undetected).  (4)  Differential  fertility  favors 
headmen,  chiefs,  or  especially  successful  hun- 
ters. They  have  more  wives  and  more  children 
in  porportion  to  other  hunters.  Their  repro- 
ductive success  has  been  a major  factor  in  the 
evolution  of  intelligence  and  will  be  discussed 
in  more  detail.  (5)  There  is  a high  frequency  of 
accidental  deaths.  Though  the  causes  of  death 
are  poorly  known,  it  does  appear  that  wild 
animals,  disease,  and  starvation,  in  various 
combinations,  are  prominent  among  the  causes 
of  death  of  subadults  and  adults.  The  category 
of  wild  animals  may  be  matched  or  exceeded 
by  intertribal  fights,  cannibalism,  and  related 
human  disaffections.  (6)  There  is  a short  life 
span.  Although  the  data  are  poor  and  probably 
over  estimate  longevity,  twenty  y^ears  is  prob- 
ably a more  accurate  estimate  for  a generation 
than  25.  Outstanding  exceptions  may  be  found 
and  the  contrast  between  short-lived  Eskimos 
in  the  Canadian  Arctic  and  much  longer-lived 
Eastern  Aleuts  has  likely  been  duplicated  in  a 
number  of  places  and  times  (Laughlin,  1963b, 
p.  638).  (7)  There  is  high  infant  mortality. 
This  again  prominently  varies  with  the  rich- 
ness of  the  exploitational  area  and  the  techno- 
logical sophistication  of  the  people.  Infanticide 
plays  an  extremely  important  role.  When  still- 
births and  miscarriages  are  considered,  the 
genetic  wastage  may  be  extremely  high.  (8) 
There  are  frequent  population  bottlenecks. 
Annual  fluctuations  in  food  supply  are  com- 
mon, especially  for  people  hunting  migratory 
animals.  Related  to  the  annual  cycles  of  the 
animals  are  those  of  environmental  conditions. 
Dramatic  annual  alterations  occur  in  desert 
areas  where  increase  or  decrease  in  water 
supply  involves  multitudinous  correlative 
changes,  and  in  arctic  regions  where  water  is 
replaced  with  ice.  Meager  storage  facilities 
make  it  impossible  to  utilize  the  common  super- 
abundance, for  example  of  caribou,  much  later 


in  the  year.  Populations  appear  to  adjust  to  the 
lower  limits  of  food  resources.  During  periods 
of  privation  the  practice  of  abortion,  infanti- 
cide, exposure  of  elderly  and  infirm  persons, 
and  “voluntary  death”  may  further  reduce  the 
population  size.  Bottlenecks  provide  oppor- 
tunity for  inadequate  sampling  between  genera- 
tions. (9)  Founder's  Principle:  New  communities 
or  demes  are  often  founded  by  only  a few 
migrants,  and  these  may  be  closely  related. 
The  genetical  importance  of  such  partitioning 
of  the  gene  pool  is  recognized  in  the  concept  of 
“founder’s  principle”  (see  Mayr,  1963,  p.  21 1). 
The  founders  carry  a small  fraction  of  the 
genetical  variation  of  the  total  population. 
Some  authors  identify  “founder’s  principle” 
with  random  genetic  drift.  This  kind  of  migrant 
sampling  has  been  extremely  important  in 
human  evolution  and  may  therefore  be  worth 
separate  itemization.  (10)  There  has  been 
fusion  of  remnant  groups.  R.  H.  Osborne  has 
noted  that  the  fusion  of  surviving  groups  fol- 
lowing a severe  bottleneck  has  an  effect  similar 
to  recurrent  selection.  The  resulting  recom- 
binations may  represent  an  improvement  over 
either  of  the  parental  contributors.  (1 1)  Gene 
flow  is  predominantly  from  central  to  marginal 
populations.  Marginal  populations  do  not 
ordinarily  feed  back  to  central  populations. 

Two  points  of  special  importance  to  the 
relationship  between  the  hunting  behavior 
pattern  and  human  evolution  are  seen  in  (a) 
the  population  characteristics  of  such  hunting 
groups  leading  to  diversity,  and  (b)  those 
favoring  the  evolution  of  intelligence.  The 
opportunities  for  random  variation  and  for  the 
development  of  differences  between  groups  are 
maximized  in  these  groups.  Small,  isolated 
populations,  with  many  subdivisions,  fre- 
quently strained  through  genetic  bottlenecks, 
and  with  ipigrant  sampling  (“founder’s  prin- 
ciple”) as  a major  form  of  moving  into  new 
territories  and  new  continents  constitutes  the 
ideal  conditions  for  rapid  evolution,  when 
viewed  over  long  time  periods,  and  for  the 
accumulation  of  many  chance  differences.  In 
examining  the  mechanism  of  human  raciation, 
and  especially  the  role  of  isolation  and  migra- 
tion, G.  Lasker  provides  the  relevant  comment : 

Race  formation  seems  to  be  a continual  pro- 
cess. Although  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  it 


Laughlin  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance  317 


has  operated  on  man,  natural  selection  has  not 
been  satisfactorily  demonstrated  as  a significant 
factor  in  racial  differentiation.  It  is  more  plausible 
that  small  groups  would  come  to  differ  racially 
by  the  purely  random  process  of  primarily  endo- 
gamous  mate  selection.  Subsequent  rapid  in- 
creases in  population  size  based  on  cultural 
advantages  or  historical  opportunities  could  be 
responsible  in  the  main  for  the  kind  of  racial 
pattern  manifest  today  (i960). 

High  intergroup  diversity  is  a characteristic 
of  the  human  species  which  is  closely  related 
to  the  group  size,  isolation,  and  generational 
and  migrational  sampling  inadequacies  of 
hunting  groups.  To  the  isolating  factors,  those 
of  culture  as  such,  of  distance  and  of  distribu- 
tional pattern,  the  common  result  of  inhibition 
of  gene  flow  over  distance,  of  dilution  of  fre- 
quencies outward  from  centers  are  especially 
effective.  As  Shapiro  has  remarked,  “Thus 
although  some  cross-cultural  miscegenation  is 
an  ancient  phenomenon  and  can  occur  in  a 
variety  of  ways,  the  isolating  effects  of  culture 
are  on  the  whole  predominant”  (1957,  p.  24). 

A major  function  of  culture  is  that  of  maxi- 
mizing the  welfare  of  its  members  and  therefore 
minimizing  and  screening  contacts  with  non- 
members. The  more  cultures  there  are,  the 
more  diffusion  barriers  there  are  to  gene  flow. 
This  is  especially  important  over  distance. 
Contemporary  racial  diversity  has  been  en- 
hanced by  the  distributional  patterns  imposed 
by  the  hunting  system.  In  fact,  viewing  the 
genetic  diversity  of  our  species  from  the  ques- 
tion of  why  it  did  not  break  into  separate 
species,  we  find  that  our  knowledge  of  what 
holds  the  species  together  is  not  well  studied. 
Mayr  has  remarked,  “The  essential  genetic 
unity  of  species  cannot  be  doubted.  Yet  the 
mechanisms  by  which  this  unity  is  maintained 
are  still  largely  unexplored.  Gene  flow  is  not 
nearly  strong  enough  to  make  these  species 
anywhere  nearly  panmictic.  It  is  far  more 
likely  that  all  the  populations  share  a limited 
number  of  highly  successful  epigenetic  systems 
and  homeostatic  devices  which  place  a severe 
restraint  on  genetic  and  phenotypic  change” 
(Mayr,  1963,  p.  523).  The  human  species  fits 
this  problem  and  deserves  the  kind  of  study 
necessary  to  elucidate  the  ways  in  which  its 
unity  has  been  maintained. 


The  rewards  accruing  to  superior  hunters 
within  a community  throw  light  on  the  evolu- 
tion of  intelligence.  The  headmen,  chiefs,  or 
leaders  are  generally  excellent  hunters.  Their 
excellence  in  hunting  depends  in  part  on  intel- 
ligence, which,  however  defined,  is  a multi- 
genic  trait  with  moderate  to  high  heritability. 
The  headmen  have  more  wives  than  other 
members  and  consequently  more  children, 
and  thus  contribute  differentially  to  the  suc- 
ceeding generation.  This  process  can  be  de- 
monstrated for  contemporary  hunters  and  its 
projection  into  earlier  times  provides  a major 
insight  into  the  way  in  which  the  hunting 
system  has  favored  the  evolution  of  intelli- 
gence. 

The  Xavante  Indians  of  Brazil  illustrate  this 
mechanism.  “As  befits  the  chief,  he  had  more 
wives  (five)  than  any  other  member  of  the 
tribe”  (Neel  et  al.,  1964,  p.  94).  This  man  had 
23  surviving  offspring  and  in  descending  order 
of  wives,  one  man  had  four  wives  and  six  off- 
spring, four  men  had  three  wives  and  thirteen 
offspring,  ten  men  had  two  wives  and  23  off- 
spring, and  21  men  had  one  wife  and  24  off- 
spring. Thus,  the  leader  has  produced  over  25 
per  cent  of  the  surviving  offspring. 

The  Anaktuvuk  Eskimos  of  Alaska,  a small 
inland  group  of  some  78  caribou  hunters, 
illustrate  the  disproportionate  contributions  of 
a superior  hunter.  One  elderly  but  able  hunter, 
one  of  the  founders  of  the  isolate,  had  seven 
children  of  whom  six  had  the  blood  group  gene 
B.  Five  matings  from  these  children  produced 
ten  children  of  whom  eight  had  at  least  one 
gene  for  blood  group  B.  Thus,  he  had  contri- 
buted to  some  20  per  cent  of  the  total  living 
population  (Laughlin,  1957). 

It  is  possible  to  generalize  on  headmen  from 
the  existing  literature.  As  a rule  they  appear  to 
be  well  informed,  to  have  better  memories, 
more  equipment  or  material  goods,  more  wives 
including  access  to  women  who  may  not  for- 
mally be  their  wives,  to  be  above  average  in 
physical  constitution,  and — directly  as  a con- 
sequence of  their  superior  hunting  abilities — 
to  have  a better  food  supply  than  those  less 
well  endowed.  A multitude  of  consequences 
follow.  The  wife,  or  wives,  of  a headman  are 
better  fed  and  more  likely  to  carry  a pregnancy 
to  full  term,  and  any  infants  are  likely  to  be 
better  fed  and  therefore  more  likely  to  survive 


3 1 8 Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

to  reproductive  age  than  those  infants  that  are 
less  well  fed. 

Crow  has  suggested  that  it  would  be  easier, 
by  selection,  to  change  the  intellectual  or  other 
aptitudes  of  a population  than  to  change  the 
incidence  of  disabling  diseases  or  sterility. 
“This  is  not  to  say  that  there  has  not  been 
some  selection  for  intelligence  in  the  past,  but 
it  has  surely  been  much  less  intense  than  that 
for  fertility,  for  example”  (Crow,  1961,  p.  429). 
This  is  certainly  true,  but  I would  suggest  that 
there  has  been  a constant  selection  for  intel- 
ligence and  that  it  has  been  sufficient  to  pre- 
pare the  species  for  a relatively  rapid  shift  over 
to  civilization  where  assortative  mating  tracks 
based  on  culturally  defined  interests  in  very 
large  populations  take  over  the  role  of  selecting 
for  intelligence  and  aptitudes. 

Evolutionary  Aspects 

Hunting  played  the  dominant  role  in  trans- 
forming a bipedal  ape  into  a tool-using  and 
tool-making  man  who  communicated  by  means 
of  speech  and  expressed  a complex  culture  in 
the  infinite  number  of  ways  now  known  to  us. 
The  evolutionary  importance  of  hunting  can 
be  demonstrated  by  a combination  of  nutri- 
tional, psychological,  and  anatomical  (includ- 
ing neurophysiological)  aspects  of  our  contem- 
porary behavior,  with  the  fossil  and  archeo- 
logical record,  and  with  primate  comparisons. 

Three  things  are  essential  to  this  thesis.  One, 
that  hunting  is  a complex  sequence  behavior 
pattern  beginning  in  childhood.  Two,  the 
nutritional  advantages  of  a carnivorous-omni- 
vorous diet  extend  into  several  aspects  of  life 
ranging  from  childhood  dependency  and 
longer  period  for  learning  over  to  the  increased 
territorial  mobility  permitting  occupation  of 
any  place  in  the  world.  Three,  hunting  be- 
havior is  prior,  psychologically,  to  the  use  and 
manufacture  of  tools.  In  brief,  what  the  tools 
were  used  for,  how  they  could  be  made  to 
serve  the  objectives  of  the  hunter,  what  the 
hunter  was  doing  that  he  needed  tools,  and 
what  he  was  doing  that  developed  the  mind 
that  conceived  the  design  of  tools,  that  executed 
their  manufacture,  and  that  employed  them 
and  revised  them,  these  are  the  important 
considerations.  Tools  provide  a thermometer 


for  measuring  intellectual  heat  generated  by 
the  animal,  they  are  not  the  source  of  heat. 
There  is  of  course  a constant  feedback  so  that 
tool  use  contributes  to  the  patterning  of  the 
brain,  thus  becoming  both  subject  and  object 
in  both  a neurological  and  philosophical  sense. 
For  these  reasons  I stress  the  importance  of  the 
behavior  first,  and  the  relevance  and  impor- 
tance of  tools  second.  Tools  did  not  make  the 
man,  man  made  tools  in  order  to  hunt. 

The  nutritional  advantages  of  a carnivorous- 
omnivorous  diet,  its  correlates  and  its  conse- 
quences are  well  attested  (Oakley,  1961  ; 
Spuhler,  1959;  Washburn  and  Avis,  1958). 
Spuhler  has  presented  the  most  succinct  itemi- 
zation in  a context  with  six  other  preconditions 
for  the  beginning  of  culture:  accommodative 
vision,  bipedal  locomotion,  manipulation, 
carnivorous-omnivorous  diet,  cortical  control 
of  sexual  behavior,  vocal  communication,  and 
expansion  of  the  association  areas  in  the  cere- 
bral cortex.  A large  supply  of  compact  animal 
proteins,  high  in  caloric  values,  concentrated 
and  packaged  in  a container  suitable  for  trans- 
port, its  own  skin,  provides  a basis  for  food 
sharing,  for  the  differentiation  of  functions  in 
a family  unit,  for  the  long  dependency  of 
human  children,  and  such  a food  supply  facili- 
tates migration  and  it  provides  more  time  in 
which  to  accomplish  other  things.  Plant-eating 
primates,  gorillas  for  example,  must  procure  a 
much  larger  bulk  of  shoots,  leaves,  and  stems 
to  have  an  equivalent  caloric  value,  and  they 
must  spend  a much  longer  period  each  day  in 
eating  their  vegetarian  diet  (Schaller,  1963, 
pp.  149-68).  They  do  not  share  food.  One  can 
only  remark  that  if  such  vegetarians  did  want 
to  share  food  they  would  need  baskets  or  wheel- 
barrows. The  amount  of  information  which 
must  be  exchanged  between  plant  eaters  is 
small  compared  with  that  needed  in  group- 
hunting of  large  animals,  wolves  for  example. 
Equally  to  the  point  is  the  lack  of  challenge  or 
psychological  stimulation  involved  in  plant 
eating.  Plants  do  not  run  away  nor  do  they 
turn  and  attack.  They  can  be  approached  at 
any  time  from  any  direction,  and  they  do  lot 
need  to  be  trapped,  speared,  clubbed,  or 
pursued  on  foot  until  they  are  exhausted. 

The  value  of  plant  food  in  sustaining  a hunt- 
ing population  during  periods  when  meat  is  in 
short  supply,  and  the  value  of  invertebrates 


Laughlin  Hunting:  An  Integrating  Biobehavior  System  and  Its  Evolutionary  Importance  319 


that  can  be  collected  by  simple  methods,  for 
example  the  crucial  use  of  sea  urchins  collected 
in  the  intertidal  zone  by  Aleuts,  cannot  be 
overlooked.  It  is  however  the  focus  on  hunting 
moving  game  that  has  organized  the  structure 
and  functioning  of  humans,  not  the  casually 
collected  foods. 

Washburn  has  remarked  (Washburn  and 
Avis,  1958,  p.  433)  that  hunting  has  had  three 
important  effects  on  human  behavior  and 
nature:  psychological,  social,  and  territorial, 
and  he  has  summarized  by  indicating  that  after 
bipedalism  came  the  use  of  tools,  the  hunting 
habit,  increase  in  intelligence  and,  finally,  the 
animal  we  know  as  man  (p.  435).  This  is  a 
coherent  and  synoptic  view  which  is  well  docu- 
mented. However,  the  priority  of  the  hunting 
habit  before  the  use  of  tools  should  be  con- 
sidered as  a necessary  sequence.  Bipedalism 
was  a necessary  precondition,  but  at  least  two 
apparently  well  differentiated  species,  Austra- 
lopithecus robustus  and  A.  africanus,  and  possibly 
a third,  “Homo  habilis,”  to  use  the  names  of 
three  groups  of  uncertain  taxonomic  status, 
were  bipedal,  and  only  one  appears  to  have 
continued  along  the  line  leading  into  man. 
The  possibility  that  desiccation  led  to  a dietary 
change  requiring  carnivorism  for  the  Austra- 
lopithecines  is  well  known,  and  the  possibility 
that  A.  robustus  remained  primarily  a vegetarian 
and  became  extinct  is  equally  well  known. 
The  archeological  evidence  is  ambiguous  and 
whether  both  of  these  lines  used  tools  and 
made  tools  is  uncertain.  If  A.  robustus  was  a 
vegetarian,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  he 
was  doing  with  tools.  On  the  other  hand,  tools 
became  useful  to  a bipedal  hunter  because  they 
do  facilitate  killing  and  the  reduction  of  the 
dead  animal  for  food  and  fabricational  purposes. 

Dental  morphology  is  of  little  help.  Gorillas 
have  very  large  canines  and  high  cusps  com- 
pared to  humans,  and  they  are  vegetarian. 
Humans  can  and  do  eat  everything  from  leaves 
to  meat  and  bones  with  no  detectable  correla- 
tion between  the  diet  and  their  dental  morpho- 
logy. In  fact,  humans  the  world  over  promptly 
remove  their  cusps  and  fissural  patterns  by 
normal  attrition  during  childhood  so  that  it  is 
difficult  to  find  a readable  fissural  pattern  in 
an  adult  male  or  female  primitive.  Chipped 
teeth  are  found  in  Eskimos  and  in  Aleuts,  in 
keeping  with  their  extensive  chewing  on  bones 


and  bone  splinters,  and  the  use  of  their  teeth 
for  fabricational  purposes.  Deducing  what 
humans  have  eaten  with  their  teeth  is  compar- 
able to  deducing  what  they  have  held  in  their 
prehensile  hand. 

At  what  point  in  the  continuous  line  leading 
to  man  we  choose  to  apply  the  label  human  is 
subjective  in  the  extreme.  Because  of  the  neces- 
sity of  childhood  instruction  for  hunting,  the 
overall  integration  of  posture,  vision,  hand, 
communication,  and  brain  required  for  hunt- 
ing behavior,  I would  suggest  that  this  was  the 
crucial  adaptation  and  therefore  provides  a 
meaningful  criterion  for  so  labeling  the 
organism  who  had  achieved  this  level  of 
organization. 

Conclusions  and  Summary 

The  overall  evolutionary  efficacy  of  hunting  as 
a master  integrating  pattern  of  our  species  is 
illustrated  in  many  ways.  Man  successfully 
evolved  with  a simple  technology  over  hun- 
dreds of  thousands  of  years;  he  migrated  into 
all  the  continents  and  climes;  he  solved  all  the 
local  problems  of  adaptation  with  ingenuity 
and  inventiveness.  These  feats  are  climaxed  by 
the  relative  rapidity  with  which  he  developed 
civilizations  and,  equally  important,  that  he 
as  a hunter  was  converted  to  civilized  man 
independently  in  different  continents.  He  was 
obviously  preadapted  and  even  predisposed  to 
civilization. 

The  inherent  ingenuity  of  primitive  hunters, 
of  marginal  peoples  generally,  can  be  attested 
by  citing  inventions  and  by  examining  the 
great  heterogeneity  ofmarginalpeoples  (Lowie, 
1952).  It  is  commonplace  to  cite  the  inventions 
of  various  peoples,  but  I think  it  more  instruc- 
tive to  assemble  them  within  the  context  of  an 
historical  tradition  rather  than  cut  across  cul- 
tures gleaning  exotic  examples.  Two  points  of 
interest  result:  the  inventions  listed  are  con- 
fined almost  entirely  to  material  devices  and 
particular  peoples  have  been  more  inventive 
than  is  generally  appreciated.  The  kayak  with 
three-piece  keelson  of  the  Aleuts,  the  snow 
dome  house  of  the  Arctic  Eskimos,  the  double- 
purchase pulley,  screw-thread,  slit  goggle, 
visor,  three-legged  stool,  etc.,  of  the  Aleut- 
Eskimo  stock  is  matched  by  their  development 


320  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

of  human  anatomical  knowledge,  their  know- 
ledge of  natural  phenomena,  prominently  in- 
cluding animal  behavior,  and  by  their  systems 
of  navigation  on  sea  and  land.  Goggles  and 
stools  are  well  known,  however;  the  non- 
material inventions  are  not.  The  material 
things  remain  clever  devices  until  the  intel- 
lectual context  of  their  invention  and  use  is 
comprehended.  Where  primitive  hunters  have 
not  invented  material  devices  that  capture  the 
attention  of  observers,  they  are  less  often 
credited  with  inventiveness  and  their  know- 
ledge in  those  areas  in  which  they  invested  their 
time  and  interest  is  underestimated. 

The  psychological  differences  between  hun- 
ters contrasted  with  farmers  and  livestock 
breeders  has  properly  been  emphasized  (Clark 
and  Piggott,  1965,  pp.  157-59).  However,  it 
should  be  noted  that  primitive  hunters  domes- 
ticated the  dog,  probably  more  than  once,  and 
this  may  have  provided  a model  for  the  domes- 
tication of  other  animals.  As  I have  suggested 
previously,  hunters  capture  animals  for  use  as 
pets  and  a major  use  is  the  instruction  of  child- 
ren in  animal  behavior.  Domestication  of  the 
dog  ranks  as  a great  achievement  in  the  investi- 
gation of  wolf  behavior  and  subsequently  in 
animal  breeding. 

The  theory  of  cultural  advance  offered  by 
Ginsburg  and  Laughlin  (1966),  suggesting  that 
crossing  the  biobehavioral  threshold  leading  to 
civilization  depended  upon  the  important  in- 
gredient of  assortative  mating  tracks  within 
large  populations,  is  an  explanation  of  how 
existing  variability  can  be  recombined  and 
repackaged  without  the  addition  of  new  genetic 
materials  or  of  outside  intervention. 

Man’s  life  as  a hunter  supplied  all  the  other 
ingredients  for  achieving  civilization : the 

genetic  variability,  the  inventiveness,  the  sys- 
tems of  vocal  communication,  the  coordination 


of  social  life.  It  could  not  provide  the  large  and 
dense  population  size  nor  the  internal  genetic 
restructuring  attendant  upon  the  establishment 
of  assortative  mating  tracks  whereby  the  fre- 
quency of  matings  between  persons  sharing 
culturally  defined  interests  and  talents  could 
be  maximized.  The  basic  anatomical  structure, 
the  neurophysiological  processes,  and  the  basic 
patterns  of  behavior  had  been  so  successfully 
organized  and  integrated  by  the  attention 
given  to  the  lifelong  study  of  behavior  and 
anatomy  and  the  other  portions  of  the  total 
sequence  pattern  that  rapid  and  extensive 
changes  could  take  place.  While  learning  to 
learn,  man,  the  hunter,  was  learning  animal 
behavior  and  anatomy,  including  his  own.  He 
domesticated  himself  first  and  then  turned  to 
other  animals  and  to  plants.  In  this  sense, 
hunting  was  the  school  of  learning  that  made 
the  human  species  self-taught. 

In  the  final  analysis  we  return  to  the  in- 
formational requirements  of  the  hunting  system 
for  the  development  of  the  individual.  Hunting 
must  be  learned  by  children  and  the  children 
must  learn  by  observation  and  by  participation 
the  habit  of  critical  observation,  the  facts  con- 
cerning animal  behavior,  and  the  appropriate 
responses.  It  is  insufficient  to  tell  children  about 
animal  behavior  and  anatomy;  it  must  be  pro- 
grammed into  them  in  a far  more  integrated 
fashion.  A corollary  point  whiph  applies  to 
hunting  groups  and  their  history  clearly  is  that 
a simple  technology  does  not  indicate  simple- 
mindedness.  We  know  a good  deal  about  the 
magnitude  of  the  task  accomplished  with 
simple  tools,  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
years  of  successful  human  evolution.  We  know 
therefore  that  the  major  information  invest- 
ment went  into  the  nervous  system  and  the 
non-material  aspects  of  the  highly  adaptive 
hunting  cultures. 


Causal  Factors  and  Processes 

in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies 


JULIAN  H.  STEWARD 


Methodological  Trends 

The  papers  of  this  conference  as  well  as  of  the 
recent  conferences  on  the  Great  Basin  and  on 
bands  seem  to  me  notable  for  the  interest  in 
causality  that  runs  through  the  comparisons 
of  prefarming  societies.  This  interest  has  led 
to  the  scrutiny  of  concepts  and  to  the  reporting 
of  kinds  of  data  that  were  accorded  little 
attention  two  or  three  decades  ago.  But,  as 
these  papers  clearly  demonstrate,  we  have  not 
yet  perfected  a methodology  for  determining 
cause-and-effect  relationships  in  the  evolution 
of  different  kinds  of  cultures.  I wish,  therefore, 
to  examine  some  of  the  methodological  impli- 
cations of  these  conferences,  especially  in  the 
conceptualization  of  the  nature  of  causes  and 
effects.  Specifically,  I stress  that  a distinction 
needs  to  be  made  between  causal  factors  and 
processes.  If  any  of  my  comments  appear  to 
contradict  my  earlier  statements,  it  is  because 
I endeavor  to  sharpen  and,  if  necessary,  re- 
design old  tools  rather  than  discard  them. 

Because  cross-cultural  comparisons  are  the 
essence  of  the  present  papers  and  discussions — 
although  they  are  not  the  only  means  of  examin- 
ing causality — the  nature  of  cultural  taxo- 
nomies and  their  use  in  determining  causal 
factors  is  of  major  concern.  The  ethnographic 
cases  reported  in  these  papers,  however,  are 


not  holistic  descriptions,  and  such  descriptions 
do  not  lend  themselves  to  explanatory  analyses. 
This  raises  the  question  of  which  aspects  of 
culture  shall  constitute  diagnostic  characteris- 
tics of  cross-cultural  types.  The  present  papers 
accord  major  attention  to  social  structures,  and 
they  generally  start  with  small  aggregates  of 
nuclear  families  and  extend  analysis  outward 
through  kinship  and  marriage  systems.  This 
emphasis  reflects  the  empirical  importance  of 
kinship  ties,  which  are  very  responsive  to  the 
inescapable  requirements  of  subsistence  activi- 
ties within  these  difficult  environments,  rather 
than  any  theoretical  presuppositions  according 
to  which  certain  characteristics  are  ascribed 
greater  importance  than  others.  Even  though 
structural  characteristics  have  a continuity 
with  past  tradition,  and  in  some  cases  may  have 
been  influenced  by  culture  contacts,  all  must 
have  sufficient  adaptability  to  remain  viable. 

Cross-cultural  comparisons  have  shown 
many  cases  of  near  similarity  of  social  struc- 
ture. There  is  danger,  however,  of  committing 
a methodological  fallacy  in  assuming  that 
similar  structural  manifestations  or  effects  are 
always  caused  by  identical  factors.  The  validity 
of  the  reverse  hypothesis,  that  similar  causes  will 
have  similar  effects,  does  not  prove  that  causes 
can  be  deduced  unfailingly  from  effects.  The 
data  of  these  conferences  have  repeatedly 


321 


322  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

demonstrated  that  similar  effects  may  be  traced 
back  to  various  combinations  of  dissimilar 
causes.  One  must,  of  course,  start  with  analysis 
of  structures  having  similar  characteristics.  A 
preliminary  taxonomy  is  inescapable.  But 
thorough  empiricism  demands  that  causality 
be  traced  in  each  case. 

In  this  methodology,  it  is  necessary  to  dis- 
tinguish causes,  processes,  and  effects  or  mani- 
festations. Although  processes  may  be  con- 
sidered causes  in  one  sense,  I conceptualize 
them  for  present  purposes  as  changes  set  in 
motion  when  more  ultimate  cultural  and  en- 
vironmental factors  are  utilized  by  human 
societies.  I define  these  ultimate  factors  as  sets 
of  cultural  devices  and  practices  and  environ- 
mental features,  which  are  no  more  than  inert 
potentials  and  which  may  be  classified  in 
separable  categories  until  they  are  activated 
and  interrelated  by  human  behavior.  Thus, 
fire,  carrying  baskets,  and  weapons  are  merely 
part  of  the  cultural  inventory  and  fishing  re- 
sources or  edible  seeds  are  features  of  the 
natural  landscape.  These  have  effects  on 
society  only  when  put  to  use,  whereupon  they 
initiate  processes  that  affect  the  nature  of 
society.  Processes  such  as  demographic  trends 
and  seasonal  aggregation  and  dispersal  of  the 
population  may  bring  about  very  similar  struc- 
tures of  the  social  groups  even  though  initiated 
by  use  of  very  dissimilar  cultural  practices  in 
quite  unlike  environments.  In  large  measure, 
these  processes  among  simpler  societies  consist 
of  cultural  ecological  adaptations. 

At  the  present  stage  of  investigations,  there 
may  be  some  question  of  whether  we  have  any 
cross-cultural  types  that  are  truly  identical 
structurally.  Detailed  analysis  discloses  ten- 
dencies rather  than  fixed  structures.  For  this 
reason,  the  term  “model”  it  - v be  preferable, 
provided  it  is  understood  to  indicate  a fairly 
high  degree  of  abstraction,  as  in  the  case  of 
Birdsell’s  models.  “Type”  perhaps  denotes  too 
great  a degree  of  substantive  similarity. 

A striking  illustration  of  two  cases  in  which 
very  different  combinations  of  causal  factors 
have  produced  generally  similar  social  struc- 
tures is  provided  by  a comparison  of  Lee’s 
!Kung  Bushmen  and  Helm’s  Dogrib  Atha- 
paskans.  In  each  case,  the  minimum  social 
aggregate  consists  of  a core  of  consanguinal 
kin  together  with  affinals  from  other  aggre- 


gates. My  concept  that  the  nuclear  family  is 
structurally  the  irreducible  social  unit  does  not 
imply  that  it  is  the  isolated  independent  social 
unit.  To  the  contrary,  among  the  Shoshoni, 
Bushmen,  Athapaskans  and  certain  other  pre- 
farming societies,  several  nuclear  families  that 
are  consanguinally  and  affinally  related 
generally  comprise  the  irreducible  aggregate, 
for  isolated  families  would  ordinarily  not  be 
viable.  These  basic  aggregates  vary  with  cir- 
cumstances and  may  range  from  ten  to  fifty 
persons,  but  usually  average  between  twenty 
and  thirty  persons.  Such  small  groups  neces- 
sarily intermarry  with  one  another. 

Owing  to  their  fluctuating  composition  and 
size,  these  minimum  groups  have  been  desig- 
nated local  bands,  micro-bands,  task  groups, 
and  camps.  Since  they  have  great  cohesion, 
owing  to  their  strong  kinship  bonds  and  joint 
subsistence  activities,  the  term  “primary  sub- 
sistence band”  seems  to  me  a useful  term  for 
distinguishing  them  from  larger  groups  or 
maximum  bands. 

Because  members  of  primary  bands  become 
closely  interrelated,  kinship  ties  extend  to  other 
such  bands.  It  seems  probable,  although  I am 
unaware  of  supporting  genealogical  evidence, 
that  a network  of  kinship  ties  as  well  as  of 
visiting  and  cooperation  extends  to  a maxi- 
mum band — the  “regional  band”  of  the 
Dogrib — of  300  to  400  persons,  where  they 
become  more  diffuse.  The  equivalent  among 
the  Bushmen  may  be  the  350  residents  of  the 
Dobe  area.  These  maximum  limitations  appear 
to  be  determined  partly  by  the  accessibility  of 
primary  bands  to  one  another,  partly  by  dis- 
tribution of  food  and  water,  and  partly  by 
bounding  deserts  or  other  barriers  beyond 
which  contacts  are  difficult. 

Owing  to  seasonal  and  often  annual  changes 
in  the  processes  that  induce  nucleation  and 
dispersal,  primary  bands  may  associate  in 
varying  numbers  for  varying  periods  of  time, 
so  that  intermediate  groupings  of  different 
sizes  and  compositions  form  and  dissolve.  These 
processes  and  their  social  consequences  are 
similar  in  an  abstract  sense  among  both 
Bushmen  and  Athapaskans,  although  very 
detailed  comparison  of  marriage  patterns  and 
other  interband  ties  discloses  special  factors 
and  processes  that  affect  particular  features. 
In  certain  other  areas,  primary  subsistence 


Steward  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies 


bands  may  have  strong  lineage  tendencies. 

My  basic  point  is  to  show  that  the  specific 
cultural  and  environmental  factors  that  initiate 
these  processes  are  very  dissimilar.  The  Bush- 
men are  80  per  cent  vegetarians  and  occupy  an 
environment  where  plant  foods  are  perennially 
available,  whereas  the  Dogrib  are  largely  fish 
and  game  eaters.  Dogrib  territories  are  ten  to 
forty  times  greater  than  those  of  the  Bushmen, 
yet  about  the  same  number  of  primary  bands 
interact  in  each  case.  The  factors  that  make 
this  possible  are,  first,  the  population  density 
of  the  Bushmen,  which  is  ten  to  forty  times 
greater  than  that  of  the  Dogrib  and  permits 
small  bands  that  use  only  human  carriers  to 
maintain  contacts  with  one  another  over  short 
distances,  and,  second,  the  use  of  canoes  and 
toboggans  by  the  Dogrib,  which  enables  the 
local  bands  to  traverse  enormous  distances.  In 
addition,  survival  in  Canada  requires  clothing, 
shelters,  and  devices  for  taking  fish  which  the 
Bushmen  lack. 

In  my  early  efforts  to  classify  and  explain 
band  types  (1936,  1938),  a distinction  between 
causal  factors  and  processes  was  implied  in  my 
stress  on  the  great  differences  in  environmental 
factors  where  similar  social  types,  such  as  the 
patrilineal  band,  occurred.  As  late  as  1949, 
however,  the  necessary  conceptualizations  re- 
mained unclarified  in  my  paper  on  the  develop- 
ment of  early  state  civilizations,  wherein  I 
ventured  to  call  attention  to  the  strikingly 
similar  sequences  of  social  structures  and  cul- 
tural achievements  of  these  states.  Because 
basic  research  on  the  development  of  these 
civilizations  really  produced  relevant  data  only 
after  World  War  II,  I inferred  that  similar 
cultural  manifestations  resulted  from  similar 
causes,  and  I took  Wittfogel’s  sweeping 
generalization  about  irrigation  to  be  the  basic 
cause  in  each  case.  Subsequent  research,  which 
Adams  (1966)  has  summarized  and  interpreted 
for  Mesoamerica  and  Mesopotamia,  has  shown 
that  irrigation  was  definitely  an  unimportant 
factor  in  these  two  areas,  although  its  role  may 
have  been  greater  elsewhere.  In  all  of  these 
early  states,  however,  similar  processes  such 
as  those  creating  interdependencies  of  local 
population  segments,  specialization,  stratifica- 
tion, centralization  of  authority,  and  others 
were  initiated  by  a number  of  factors  that  have 
not  yet  been  clearly  identified. 


323 

In  the  case  of  the  prefarming  societies  re- 
ported in  these  conferences,  my  effort  to  iden- 
tify causes  has  revealed  an  astonishingly  small 
number  of  factors.  Viewed  in  terms  of  their 
formal  and  stylistic  characteristics,  thousands 
of  cultural  elements  might  be  listed  as  causal 
factors.  The  provisional  list  given  later  is  based 
on  function — on  whether  a society  has  the 
means  of  getting  certain  kinds  of  jobs  done.  It 
involves  such  basic  categories  of  activity  as 
food  collecting,  fishing,  hunting,  transporta- 
tion, food  preservation  and  preparation,  and, 
in  some  areas,  clothing  and  shelter.  Some  of 
the  categories  have  been  accorded  detailed 
attention  in  these  conferences,  but  others  have 
been  largely  ignored.  The  importance  of  trans- 
portation to  interband  contacts  and  activities, 
which  I have  suggested  in  comparing  the  Bush- 
men and  Dogrib,  has  been  almost  wholly  neg- 
lected, perhaps  because  it  is  so  obvious.  One 
wonders,  however,  by  what  means  men  got 
about  over  the  deep  snows  of  glacial  age 
Europe. 

The  present  conference  clearly  demonstrates 
that  hunting  is  not  a primary  diagnostic 
characteristic  of  social  types.  Hunting  is  not 
even  a single  causal  factor.  Comparison  of 
societies  that  do  some  hunting — and  only  in- 
habitants of  oceanic  islands  are  non-hunters — 
indicates  that  there  are  many  kinds  of  hunting, 
each  involving  different  cultural  means,  dis- 
tinctive kinds  of  game,  and  varied  social  pro- 
cesses that  cause  different  kinds  of  societies. 
Hunting  cannot  be  isolated  from  other  factors, 
but  a comparative  study  of  hunting  would  have 
enormous  value  in  indicating  the  subcategories 
into  which  it  may  be  divided. 

An  empirical  approach  that  extends  inquiry 
from  cultural  manifestations  through  processes 
to  ultimate  causes  may  theoretically  have  great 
value  for  reconstructing  lines  of  past  evolution. 
If  cultural  and  environmental  factors  can  be 
reduced  to  a limited  number  of  basic  functional 
categories,  we  should  be  able  within  the  limi- 
tations of  prehistoric  identification  of  these 
factors  to  infer  the  nature  of  the  society.  Thus, 
the  inherent  difficulty  of  using  ethnographic 
models,  especially  holistic  models,  to  interpret 
prehistoric  materials  will  be  avoided.  This 
matter  has  properly  concerned  many  persons, 
such  as  Freeman,  L.  R.  Binford,  S.  R.  Binford, 
Sackett,  Deetz,  and  others.  Although  analysis 


324  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

starts  with  cultural  manifestations,  it  does  not 
infer  causality  by  correlating  such  manifesta- 
tions, as  in  “factor  analysis”  (for  example, 
Sawyer  and  Levine,  1966),  and  it  does  not 
project  ethnographic  types  backward  as  hypo- 
thetical evolutionary  stages.  So  far  as  my 
method  is  distinctive,  it  might  be  designated 
“causal  factor  identification”  or  “causal  factor 
determination.” 


Factor  Determination 

The  effects  of  the  cultural  factors  listed  below 
are  vividly  suggested  if  we  can  imagine  what 
human  societies  would  be  like  if  any  were  ab- 
sent. The  comparison  of  men  and  apes  made 
subsequently  discloses  sharp  contrasts  between 
cultural  and  non-cultural  beings,  but  what 
would  human  societies  be  like  if  they  lacked 
human  carrying  devices,  means  of  processing 
or  storing  food,  or  devices  for  obtaining  animals 
that  may  run,  fly,  or  swim  away? 

All  recent  societies  have  means  of  collecting 
vegetable  foods,  hunting,  fishing,  transporting 
and  preparing  food.  So  far  as  these  factors  are 
concerned,  local  differences  must  be  ascribed 
to  environmental  variables.  But  certain  en- 
vironments have  entailed  additional  factors. 
Imagine,  then,  the  Eskimo  without  dog  sleds, 
skin  boats,  and  special  apparatus  for  marine 
hunting  and  fishing,  the  Northwest  Coast  with- 
out sea-going  canoes  and  elaborate  techniques 
for  fishing  and  hunting  sea  mammals,  the 
northern  Athapaskans  without  canoes  and 
toboggans,  any  peoples  of  the  extreme  north 
without  adequate  shelter  and  clothing,  or  desert 
dwellers  without  means  of  transporting  water. 
(One  case  of  the  last  has  been  reported  in 
Mexico.)  Food  preservation  and  storage  is 
necessary  when  there  are  seasons  with  no  vege- 
table growth,  when  game  migrates  away  or 
fish  runs  cease.  In  tropical  and  subtropical 
latitudes,  preservation  and  storage  may  not  be 
necessary  if,  as  Lee  has  shown  for  the  Bushmen 
(Chapter  4,  this  volume)  and  Woodburn  for 
the  Hadza  (Chapters  5 and  1 1 , this  volume), 
foraging  is  possible  perennially.  This  crucial 
matter,  however,  has  been  largely  ignored. 

A related  problem  is  how  much  processing 
is  necessary  to  utilize  all  possible  resources. 
This  involves  not  only  the  role  of  cooking  and 


other  processing  of  vegetable  foods,  but  the 
very  important  matter  of  meat  eating.  Did 
man’s  physiology  undergo  evolutionary  changes 
as  he  became  a carnivore?  Did  fire,  which 
apparently  appeared  after  meat  eating,  help 
make  spoiled  meats  digestible  ? 

In  my  list,  large  game  hunting  is  a single  factor 
because  it  includes  ways  of  taking  large, 
mobile  animals.  Closer  scrutiny  of  hunting 
might  warrant  several  major  subcategories 
based  especially  on  the  nature  of  the  game.  In 
the  Great  Basin,  deer  were  ambushed  or  pur- 
sued by  relays  of  hunters,  mountain  sheep  were 
taken  with  the  help  of  dogs  in  the  high  peaks, 
and  antelope  were  driven  by  men,  women,  and 
children  into  enclosures.  Although  any  of  these 
animals  might  be  taken  by  a single  hunter, 
each  of  the  more  productive  hunts  involved  a 
different  kind  of  cooperation.  An  individual 
lucky  enough  to  wound  a deer  might  have  to 
trail  it  for  hours  or  days  before  it  died. 

Without  making  a detailed  comparative 
study  of  hunting,  I treat  this  category  with 
considerable  misgivings.  Quantification  of  the 
yield  of  hunting  in  comparison  with  food  col- 
lecting (Lee,  Chapter  4,  this  volume)  has 
shown  that  it  is  astonishingly  small — perhaps 
30  per  cent  of  the  food — except  in  higher 
latitudes.  Intimate  knowledge  of  the  habits 
and  habitats  of  game  of  different  kinds — the 
size,  migratory  patterns,  extent  of  herding, 
and  reactions  to  human  beings — as  well  as  of 
the  cultural  devices  available  for  hunting  are 
also  necessary.  The  lone  Hadza  hunter  armed 
only  with  a bow  and  arrow  must  have  been  at 
some  disadvantage  in  confronting  an  African 
buffalo  or  rhino.  What  of  lower  Paleolithic 
hunters  whose  artifacts  include  only  hand  axes 
and  perhaps  bolas  ? Did  they  construct  pitfalls 
large  enough  for  elephants,  confront  rhinos 
with  bolas  or  throwing  sticks,  or  bring  down 
fleet  antelope  with  untipped  wooden  spears? 
Did  they  hunt  mainly  the  young  of  these 
animals  or  seek  smaller  species?  Did  they 
scavenge? 

The  cultural  ecological  factors  with  which 
we  are  concerned  obviously  cannot  be  divorced 
from  environmental,  historical,  and  biological 
factors,  which  may  constitute  preconditions 
for  their  operation.  These  other  factors  are  also 
reducible  to  a few  basic  categories,  and  they 
require  only  brief  mention. 


Steward  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies 


Biological  Factors 

Contrary  to  the  culturological  assumption  that 
evolution  must  not  be  reduced  to  biological 
factors,  the  latter  cannot  be  ignored,  first,  be- 
cause certain  fundamental  characteristics  of 
human  beings  changed  during  cultural  evolu- 
tion and,  second,  because  they  are  precondi- 
tions of  all  modern  cultures. 

In  the  course  of  biological  evolution,  the 
early  hominids  acquired  bipedalism,  which 
enormously  extended  their  range  as  compared 
with  that  of  their  quadrupedal  ancestors.  At 
a very  early  time,  they  also  became  meat 
eaters,  which  vastly  increased  their  subsistence 
potentials  and  may  have  been  a precondition 
of  living  in  northern  climates.  The  period  of 
dependency  of  the  immature  hominid  became 
greatly  lengthened,  thus  strengthening  mother- 
child  bonds  but  also  restricting  women’s  activi- 
ties. In  ethnographic  cases,  where  males  have 
the  complementary  function  of  hunting,  wo- 
men’s roles  in  the  nuclear  family  became  more 
specialized  and  restrictive. 

Enlargement  of  the  brain  and  all  that  this 
implies  have  become  distinctive  human  charac- 
teristics, but  they  do  not  explain  any  particular 
features  of  culture.  It  might  be  said  that,  to 
the  contrary,  the  vast  human  adaptability  they 
permit  is  basic  to  the  increasing  range  of  cul- 
tural variations. 

Cultural  Factors 

The  subsequent  list  of  cultural  factors  is  drawn 
from  ethnographic  cases,  and  it  is  intended  to 
explore  the  possibilities  of  a functional  classi- 
fication of  causal  factors.  It  is  remarkable  that 
so  many  of  these  factors  are  present  where  they 
are  useful.  All  societies  have  some  means  of 
collecting,  hunting,  preparing,  and  transport- 
ing foods,  and  all  that  occupy  regions  of 
seasonal  shortages  have  some  means  of  storing 
foods.  All  that  live  in  winter  climates  have 
adequate  clothing  and  shelter.  Those  which 
occupy  areas  where  water  craft  expedite  fishing 
and  transportation  have  canoes,  skin  vessels, 
or  simple  balsa  rafts.  This  is  not  to  say  that  all 
hunting  and  gathering  societies  have  achieved 
maximum  efficiency  in  the  exploi  tation  of  their 
environments,  but  their  knowledge  of  re- 
sources and  cultural  devices  is  extraordinarily 


325 

extensive.  Absence  of  certain  factors  in  margi- 
nal areas  —Australia  and  the  extreme  south  of 
Africa  and  of  South  America — is  expectable, 
since  some  late  inventions  did  not  diffuse  to  all 
societies.  Some  absences,  therefore,  may  have 
made  a greater  difference  than  has  been  noted. 
But,  unless  the  effect  of  each  factor  is  carefully 
analyzed,  we  could  be  misled. 

Could  the  Australians  have  hunted  marsu- 
pials more  effectively  with  bows  and  arrows? 
Even  if  true,  was  their  hunting  success  primarily 
limited  by  the  quantity  of  game?  Are  there 
major  fisheries  that  remained  unexploited  for 
lack  of  canoes  and  fishing  gear?  Perhaps,  but 
the  Chilean  archipelago,  which  has  been  cited 
as  backward  for  want  of  diffused  culture  traits, 
simply  had  very  minor  marine  resources. 
Could  populations  have  increased  in  certain 
areas  had  the  people  stored  a maximum 
amount  of  food  when  it  was  available?  This  is 
a complicated  question,  for  it  involves  factors 
other  than  subsistence,  but  it  seems  likely  that 
what  Birdsell  calls  the  “equilibrium  system” 
rather  than  nutrition  alone  controlled  the 
popidation  density. 

Another  aspect  of  the  question  of  maximum 
use  of  the  environment  is  whether  these 
societies  might,  without  any  changes  in  environ- 
ment or  improved  cultural  devices,  have  aug- 
mented their  subsistence,  sustained  larger 
populations,  and  nucleated  in  greater  aggre- 
gates, if  they  had  been  more  industrious.  If 
food  getting  required  only  one  third  to  one 
half  the  total  time,  an  increase  of  food  would 
seem  possible.  I think,  however,  that  Sahlins’ 
picture  of  “affluent”  hunters  and  gatherers  is 
very  unrealistic.  Any  abundance  during  brief 
periods  dwindled  until,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Shoshoni,  it  ended  in  near  starvation  before 
new  supplies  became  available.  When  the 
necessary  food  trek  began,  travel  in  tempera- 
tures over  ioo°  away  from  water  sources  while 
carrying  children,  gear,  and  water  was  a 
thoroughly  unpleasant  necessity.  Again,  one 
must  conclude  with  Birdsell,  that  the  equili- 
brium of  factors  maintained  a population  at 
fairly  constant  levels  over  periods  of  time.  Any 
local  or  temporary  abundance  of  foods  could 
not  be  laid  up  to  insure  more  abundant  nutri- 
tion throughout  the  whole  year  or  a succession 
of  years  to  increase  the  population. 

Distinctions  made  in  the  following  list  are 


326  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

handicapped  by  the  absence  of  unambiguous 
subsistence  terms.  Foraging  denotes  eating  foods 
as  they  are  gathered,  and  it  is  an  activity  that 
man  shares  with  many  other  animals.  Food  extrac- 
tion has  been  employed  to  designate  utilization  of 
natural  resources  and  food  production  for  use  of 
plant  and  animal  domesticates.  Food  gathering 
or  food  collecting  are  traditional  terms  for  ex- 
traction of  vegetable  foods,  larvae,  and  other 
small  items,  but  they  do  not  imply  what  is  done 
with  the  food  collected.  An  additional  term 
such  as  food  storing  could  be  used  to  indicate 
that  the  foods  are  transported  to  another 
locality,  sometimes  to  a central  encampment, 
where  they  are  stored  to  provide  sustenance 
for  varying  lengths  of  time.  Food  scavenging  is  a 
useful  concept  if  delimited  to  the  consumption 
of  animals  that  have  been  killed  by  predators, 
crippled,  accidentally  entrapped,  or  stranded, 
as  in  the  case  of  whales.  Scavenging  does  not 
involve  the  question  of  whether  hominids,  like 
vultures,  ate  putrescent  meat.  There  are  many 
ethnographic  reports  of  scavenging,  although 
hunting  implies  the  killing  of  live  animals. 

1 . Foraging.  If  the  only  foods  eaten  are  those 
foraged,  but  not  hunted  Or  stored,  occupation 
of  areas  of  cold  winters  must  have»been  rare  or 
impossible.  Subsistence,  moreover,  would  not 
differ  greatly  from  that  of  the  apes,  except  in 
the  larger  area  covered  by  bipedal  animals. 

2.  Collecting.  Many  foods,  such  as  fruits,  nuts, 
shellfish,  eggs,  insects,  and  larvae  were  eaten 
as  they  were  gathered,  that  is,  foraged,  al- 
though they  were  obtained  in  greater  quantity 
by  means  of  various  cultural  devices,  for 
example,  containers,  digging  sticks,  climbing 
rings,  poles,  and  others.  All  societies  carried  on 
this  activity  by  one  means  or  another. 

Assembling  food  at  a central  point  requires 
transportation,  which  can  be  considered  a 
separate  factor.  If  storage  involves  accumula- 
tion of  more  than  enough  for  immediate  needs, 
and  especially  enough  for  long  periods,  it 
requires  special  preparation.  Storage  is  not  a 
universal  factor  and  it  is  therefore  listed 
separately. 

3.  Small  game  hunting.  This  category  is  dis- 
tinguished from  large  game  hunting  because 
it  does  not  always  require  men  to  absent  them- 
selves from  their  band  for  arduous  and  extensive 
cooperative  efforts.  Small  game  such  as  rodents, 
rabbits,  hares,  small  species  of  ungulates,  mar- 


supials and  mammals,  monkeys,  various  rep- 
tiles, and  birds  are  taken  by  an  extraordinary 
variety  of  traps,  nets,  snares,  pitfalls,  deadfalls, 
throwing  sticks,  spears,  arrows,  blowguns,  bird 
lime,  and  other  devices  more  often  than  by 
methods  used  for  large,  far-ranging  mammals. 
To  the  extent  that  hunters  did  not  have  to 
leave  their  bands  for  long  periods,  this  factor 
supplemented  food  collecting. 

Because  most  societies  had  reasonably  effec- 
tive means  of  hunting  small  game,  variation  in 
the  effects  of  this  factor  depended  more  upon 
the  nature  and  abundance  of  game  than  on 
culture.  It  was  probably  of  major  importance 
in  northern  latitudes  where  small  game  could 
be  a major  source  of  food  during  the  winters. 
Traplines  exploited  for  a commercial  market, 
however,  may  have  very  different  effects  than 
native  trapping  and  do  not  fall  under  “small 
game  hunting.” 

4.  Large  game  hunting.  This -category  is  dis- 
tinguished from  the  last  in  its  reference  to 
hunting  large,  herbivorous,  fairly  mobile,  ter- 
restrial animals,  whose  means  of  self-protection 
present  serious  problems.  These  animals  are 
either  fleet,  have  tough  hides,  or  make  formid- 
able foes.  Hunting  them  by  digging  pitfalls 
or  preparing  ambushes,  surrounds,  and  pur- 
suits required  great  effort  and  entailed  co- 
operation as  well  as  endurance.  Confrontation 
of  such  animals  as  rhinos  and  elephants  also 
required  caution. 

The  Upper  Paleolithic  seems  to  have  marked 
a climax  in  hunting.  Many  animals,  including 
now  extinct  giant  species,  were  taken  with 
stone-tipped  spears  and  atlatls  and  probably  by 
other  means.  How  large  animals  were  killed  in 
lower  Paleolithic  times  is  perplexing,  for  use  of 
wooden  spears  or  any  other  means  is  inferential. 
Yet  Isaac  describes  an  Acheulian  site  in  East 
Africa  containing  bones  of  elephants,  rhinos, 
and  hippos  (Chapter  26,  this  volume).  Early 
Paleolithic  stone  industries  include  choppers 
or  fist  hatchets,  and  later  traditions  include 
flake  tools,  that  suggest  skin  working,  but 
nothing  indicates  weapons  for  killing  or  wound- 
ing from  a distance.  The  use  of  bolas  by  men  on 
foot  to  entangle  large,  tough-skinned  mammals 
until  they  were  killed  with  wooden  spears  or 
stones  would  seem  to  be  a difficult  feat.  To 
excavate  a pitfall  large  enough  for  any  of  these 
animals  would  be  a prodigious  task.  It  will  be 


Steward  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies  327 


interesting  to  learn  how  often  a Hadza  hunter 
armed  only  with  a bow  could  seriously  wound 
a rhino  or  elephant. 

Other  possible  methods  were,  as  Isaac  sug- 
gests, poisoning  water  holes,  or,  to  use  ethno- 
graphic analogies,  drives  with  fire  over  cliffs  or 
into  bogs.  Possibly,  like  some  of  the  Congo 
Negritoes,  elephants  could  be  induced  to  im- 
pale themselves  on  spears,  although  this  hardly 
seems  to  commend  itself  as  a routine  procedure. 

A simple  method  of  taking  these  large  species 
would  be  to  hunt  only  the  young  or  crippled 
stragglers.  Still  simpler  would  be  scavenging. 

5.  Aquatic  hunting.  In  many  areas,  water 
mammals  such  as  whales,  seals,  walrus,  otter, 
dugongs,  and  others  were  a fairly  important 
subsistence  resource,  and  the  local  societies 
seem  always  to  have  possessed  some  effective 
means  of  taking  them,  such  as  spears,  harpoons, 
arrows,  and  various  accessories.  Since  these 
animals  are  riverine  or  marine,  some  kind  of 
water  craft  were  generally  used  to  hunt  and 
transport  them.  Their  importance  to  social 
structures  is  similar  to  'that  of  large  game 
hunting  in  that  they  required  much  time, 
effort,  and  cooperation  between  males.  Most 
areas  of  aquatic  hunting,  however,  were  also 
major  fishing  areas. 

6.  Fishing.  This  category  is  enormously  vari- 
able, for  it  includes  cases  in  which  fishing  was 
so  unimportant  as  to  be  a type  of  food  collect- 
ing and  other  cases  in  which  its  effect  was 
comparable  to  aquatic  mammal  hunting.  Ex- 
cept for  certain  coastal  and  island  areas,  most 
major  fisheries  were  riverine  and  required 
traps,  weirs,  baskets,  and  nets  as  well  as 
canoes.  Where  fishing  was  of  major  importance, 
a high  degree  of  social  cooperation  was  re- 
quired. Even  where  fishing  was  only  an  im- 
portant supplement  to  other  subsistence,  as  in 
the  Amazon,  there  was  considerable  cooperation 
in  use  of  poisons,  canoes,  and  other  methods. 

There  may  be  areas  of  rich  fisheries  that 
were  unexploited  for  want  of  canoes,  nets, 
hooks,  or  other  devices,  but  simple  societies 
seem  to  have  made  excellent  use  of  their  re- 
sources by  one  means  or  another.  Fish  drugs, 
for  example,  are  very  widely  distributed,  and 
in  South  America  alone  several  hundred  dif- 
ferent plants  are  used  for  this  purpose. 

7.  Transportational  devices.  The  importance 
of  transportation  has  been  mentioned  in  con- 


nection with  accumulating  and  storing  foods 
at  some  central  point.  Tt  is  also  essential  for 
transporting  children  and  basic  gear  as  a 
society  moves  about.  Ethnographically,  there 
are  four  subcategories  of  transportation. 

a.  Human  carriers.  All  societies  have  some 
means  of  carrying  foods,  children,  and  various 
impedimenta.  These  devices,  though  highly 
varied,  are  generally  limited  in  efficiency  by 
human  strength. 

b.  Sleds  and  toboggans.  Where  snow  provides 
suitable  surfaces,  human  beings  can  pull 
greater  loads  than  they  can  carry.  Dog  traction 
adds  further  to  the  transportational  potentials. 
It  seems  certain  that  the  great  territorial  range 
of  societies  in  the  far  north  were  a function  of 
such  transportation,  complemented  by  water 
craft  in  the  summer.  It  should  also  offset  the 
need  for  infanticide,  in  which  case  Eskimo 
infanticide  was  practiced  for  reasons  other 
than  women’s  limitations  on  carrying  children 
(see  Balikci,  1964). 

c.  Water  craft.  Umiaks,  kayaks,  bark  or  dug- 
out  canoes,  and  balsa  rafts  give  an  enormous 
advantage  in  such  subsistence  activities  as 
fishing,  aquatic  hunting,  and  even  gathering 
wild  rice,  and  they  also  increase  transporta- 
tional potentials.  Except  for  certain  marginal 
areas,  such  as  Tierra  del  Fuego  and  parts  of 
Australia,  where  better  use  might  have  been 
made  of  water  craft,  few  societies  lacked  some 
kind  of  water  transportation  adequate  to  their 
needs. 

The  relatively  high  population  density  of 
coastal  areas  is  obviously  correlated  with  the 
combined  land,  sea,  and  littoral  resources,  but 
these  areas  usually  have  canoes  which  facilitate 
subsistence  activities  and  permit  concentration 
in  large,  permanent  communities.  In  the 
Amazon,  communities  increased  in  size  after 
steel  axes  enabled  the  people  to  range  farther 
from  the  villages  for  foods. 

d.  Dog  traction  and  packing.  Use  of  dogs  is 
probably  comparatively  recent,  and  it  has 
limited  distribution.  The  dog  sled  is  certainly 
a major  factor  in  the  enormous  range  of  some 
of  the  arctic  societies  and  therefore  also  a factor 
in  permitting  large  periodic  aggregations.  The 
dog-drawn  travois  and  dog  packing  of  the 
Plains  were  also  of  considerable  value.  Lowie 
(1963,  p.  42)  cites  Coronado  that  dogs  could 
draw  35  to  50  pounds  on  travois. 


328  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

8.  Food  preparation.  Many  methods  of  treating 
vegetable  and  perhaps  animal  products  extend 
the  number  of  foods  beyond  that  of  precultural 
animals. 

a.  Mechanical  processing.  Certain  hard-shell 
seeds  and  nuts  must  be  opened  before  eating, 
but  this  can  be  accomplished  with  crude  stones 
nearly  as  well  as  with  metates  and  mortars. 
Greater  efficiency  may  have  increased  leisure 
time  rather  than  the  amount  of  food.  Other 
processing,  such  as  winnowing  seeds  or  cutting 
raw  meat  presents  no  problem,  and  stone- 
cutting tools  have  great  antiquity. 

b.  Poison  extraction.  Some  foods,  such  as 
acorns  in  California  and  elsewhere  and  the 
cycad  of  Australia,  are  made  edible  by  extrac- 
ting harmful  ingredients.  Domesticated  manioc 
( Manihot  utillisima)  is  elaborately  treated  with 
the  tipiti  to  remove  the  prussic  acid,  but  Gold- 
man states  (1948,  p.  772)  that  the  acid  readily 
boils  off  or  disappears  with  drying  or  soaking 
in  water.  The  Great  Basin  staple,  pine  nuts 
(. Pinus  edulis  and  P.  monophyla),  may  be  eaten 
raw,  but  roasting  seems  to  change  if  not  remove 
much  of  the  resin. 

c.  Cooking.  Although  many  fruits,  greens, 
buds,  and  nuts  require  no  treatment,  probably 
the  majority  of  foods,  including  roots,  seeds, 
fish,  and  game,  were  cooked  when  necessary, 
and  sometimes  when  not  necessary.  In  addition 
to  tenderizing  foods,  cooking  may  change 
deleterious  chemicals  and  perhaps  kills  bacteria 
in  over-ripe  meat.  If,  however,  the  use  of  fire 
was  not  general  until  the  second  interstadial 
period  (Clark  and  Piggott,  1965,  p.  49),  per- 
haps at  about  the  first  appearance  of  Homo 
sapiens,  the  earlier  species  of  H.  erectus,  avoided 
poisonous  plants  and  consumed  meats  raw.  In 
this  case,  the  conversion  to  a meat  diet  was 
accomplished  without  the  aid  of  cooking. 

All  ethnographic  cases  have  some  means  of 
cooking  foods  of  all  kinds — r oasting  on  coals  or 
in  earth  ovens,  boiling  in  pots  or  with  hot 
stones  in  containers  of  hide,  basketry,  bark, 
wood,  etc.,  broiling  over  coals  or  on  babracots, 
and  others.  Cooking,  therefore,  is  another  uni- 
versal or  constant  factor. 

9.  Food  preservation  and  storage.  It  has  been 
noted  that  certain  tribes  in  low  latitudes  do 
not  preserve  or  store  foods — -for  example,  the 
Bushmen  and  Hadza — because  vegetable  re- 
sources can  be  obtained  at  any  time.  Storage 


is  difficult  in  tropical  areas  because  of  heat  and 
humidity,  but  farming  societies  were  able  to 
preserve  certain  foods.  In  higher  latitudes, 
however,  where  preservation  and  storage  of 
foods  are  essential  during  certain  seasons,  all 
societies  have  appropriate  techniques. 

This  factor  has  many  subcategories:  protec- 
tion of  seeds  against  moisture  and  marauding 
animals,  drying  and  smoking  flesh,  and  pre- 
servative mixtures  such  as  pemmican  in  which 
the  meat  is  protected  by  adding  fat. 

10.  Shelter  and  clothing.  Special  factors  are 
necessary  to  survive  in  certain  environments. 
These  include  for  cold  climates  adequate 
clothing  and  footgear,  which  the  Clactonian 
stone  flake  industry  shows  were  probably  made 
by  the  second  interstadial  period  of  Europe, 
perhaps  fire  which  appeared  about  the  same 
time,  and  possibly  means  of  travel  on  deep 
snow  of  which  we  have  evidence  only  from 
ethnographic  sources.  Clothing  and  shelters 
were  less  imperative  in  warm  climates,  al- 
though all  known  societies  improvised  tem- 
porary lean-tos  and  in  some  of  the  tropics  pro- 
tected the  body  against  insects  with  capes  or 
with  grease. 

Environmental  Factors 

Environmental  features  are  significant  in  terms 
of  their  functional  importance  to  ecological 
adaptations  rather  than  their  intrinsic  proper- 
ties such  as  climate,  topography,  or  biota;  for 
dissimilar  environments  may  support  somewhat 
similar  societies  if  exploited  in  certain  ways. 

First,  there  are  environmental  potentials 
which,  if  exploited  by  appropriate  cultural 
devices,  determine  the  overall  population 
density. 

Second,  there  are  factors  which  affect  the 
nucleation  of  social  segments.  Natural  barriers 
may  separate  major  population  groups  and 
sometimes  fairly  small  groups.  Distribution  of 
foods,  as  along  shorelines,  rivers,  or  lakes,  and 
localization  of  water  may  entail  special  kinds 
of  nucleation.  Transportational  devices  other 
than  human  carriers  will  profoundly  affect 
nucleation  in  areas  where  these  can  be  used. 

Third,  the  nature  of  the  flora  and  fauna 
requires  various  kinds  of  subsistence  activities, 
including  certain  patterns  of  cooperation  and 
sharing. 


Steward  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies 


Fourth,  subsistence  in  some  zones  necessi- 
tates no  food  storing,  whereas  in  others,  es- 
pecially in  hard  winter  climates,  it  is  impossible 
without  considerable  storage  and  methods  of 
preservation.  Accessories,  such  as  clothing, 
shelters,  and  possibly  fire,  are  also  required  by 
winter  climates. 

Cultural-Historical  Factors 

Perhaps  90  per  cent  of  any  tribal  cultural  in- 
ventory including  subsistence  devices  is  bor- 
rowed. Whether  borrowed  or  locally  innovated, 
the  important  consideration  is  the  function  of 
cultural  features  of  different  kinds  to  varying 
kinds  of  social  aggregates.  Exploitative  devices 
are  readily  borrowed  if  they  are  useful.  Re- 
strictive marriage  institutions,  such  as  clans 
and  moieties,  will  ordinarily  be  impossible 
among  small  widely  separate  primary  groups 
or  bands  whose  choice  of  marriage  partners  is 
already  limited.  Clans,  although  highly  deve- 
loped in  the  Southwest  and  part  of  the  Plains, 
did  not  spread  to  the  sparsely  populated  Great 
Basin  or  the  Mackenzie  River  drainage.  Among 
societies  of  sparse  population,  the  only  institu- 
tions pertaining  to  aggregates  larger  than  the 
subsistence  bands  were  ceremonialism,  includ- 
ing initiation  rites  in  some  areas,  and  games, 
contests,  and  dances  that  became  functional 
only  when  the  larger  group  was  assembled. 

On  the  other  hand,  large  permanent  com- 
munities or  strongly  integrated  bands  or  tribes 
permitted  complex  social  and  ritual  elabora- 
tion, as  on  the  Northwest  Coast  or  the  Plains. 
It  is  of  historical  interest  but  minor  importance 
functionally  whether  the  clans,  moieties,  social 
stratification  and  potlatches  of  the  Northwest 
Coast  and  the  strong  chieftanship,  sun  dance, 
war  patterns  and  proliferation  of  associations 
of  the  Plains  were  borrowed  from  elsewhere  or 
developed  locally.  These  supra-kin-level  insti- 
tutions were  possible  only  if  ecological  pre- 
conditions existed,  although  they  became  func- 
tionally intertwined  with  subsistence  activities. 

Evolutionary  Factors  and  Processes 
Non-Cultural  Adaptations 

The  effects  of  cultural  ecological  factors  be- 
come most  readily  apparent  when  projected 


329 

against  the  non-cultural  adaptations  of  certain 
of  the  primates.  The  most  instructive  primates 
are  the  chimpanzees,  gorillas,  and  baboons, 
for  they  have  received  greatest  attention  and 
are  most  similar  to  hominids  in  several  respects. 
These  primates  have  greatest  body  size,  di- 
morphism, perennial  sexuality,  some  degree 
of  terrestriality,  a varied  subsistence  basis 
mainly  within  the  range  of  plant  foods,  and 
high  adaptability.  Their  behavior  discloses 
patterns  within  the  limits  of  these  biological 
potentials,  and  it  is  not  therefore  a genetically 
determined  archetype  from  which  hominid 
behavior  was  necessarily  derived.  It  represents 
patterns  of  the  ancestors  of  hominids  only  to 
the  extent  that  ecological  adaptations  may  be 
assumed  to  have  been  similar. 

1.  Subsistence.  These  primates  are  herbi- 
vorous, except  that  some  consume  small  insects 
and  mammals  (DeVore,  1963,  p.  32)  and  the 
chacma  baboons  eat  shellfish,  crabs,  birds’ 
eggs,  and  young  birds  (Hall,  1963,  p.  6-18). 
Goodall  reported  only  three  occasions  during 
eighteen  months  when  chimpanzees  scavenged 
meat  (1963,  p.  46).  Food  is  found  predomi- 
nantly in  trees — 90  per  cent  among  the  chim- 
panzees (Goodall,  1963,  p.  40) — which  limits 
subsistence  areas  to  stands  of  appropriate  trees. 
Lacking  transportation  and  storage  devices, 
these  foragers  do  not  accumulate  surpluses  to 
establish  even  temporary  encampments.  There 
is  no  food  sharing,  even  between  mothers  and 
offspring — which  is  true  of  herbivores  generally 
in  contrast  to  carnivores — -and  consequently  no 
cooperation  or  dependencies  based  on  subsis- 
tence activities. 

2.  Territoriality.  Evidence  on  territoriality  is 
conflicting,  partly,  I suspect,  because  of  the 
meaning  attached  to  the  term.  Habitual  use  of 
a delimited  territory  and  familiarity  with  the 
members  of  one’s  own  troop  apparently  inhibit 
free  association  with  strangers  within  the  same 
species.  In  addition,  as  Schaller  (1963,  p.  27) 
clearly  states  of  gorillas,  the  territory  of  each 
troop  is  separated  from  that  of  other  troops  by 
uninhabitable  areas.  Unequal  concentrations 
of  resources,  therefore,  would  predispose  any 
species  to  a degree  of  troop  isolation.  Owing 
to  natural  vicissitudes  of  troop  expansion  and 
contraction,  however,  there  would  be  budding 
off  in  some  cases  and  amalgamation  in  others. 

The  tendency  toward  territoriality  is 


330  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

explainable  by  the  ecological  adaptations  of 
various  types  of  animals  rather  than  by  some 
genetically  determined  possessiveness  which 
Ardrey  in  sensational  articles  in  Life  (1966a, 
1966b)  represents  as  the  basis  of  conflict  in 
man.  Grazing  herbivores  of  many  species  inter- 
mingled freely,  and  their  herds  are  limited  only 
by  the  extent  of  fodder.  They  defend  them- 
selves against  predators  rather  than  other 
herbivores.  Male  competition  for  cstrous  fe- 
males is  irrelevant  to  territoriality.  Carnivorous 
predators,  on  the  other  hand,  defend  their  kill 
and,  unlike  herbivores,  share  it.  If  game  is 
locally  scarce,  they  may  come  into  competition 
with  other  groups  of  their  species. 

3.  Group  and  territory  size.  Ape  troops  vary  in 
size  with  population  density,  for  the  home 
range  of  these  quadrupeds  is  only  a fraction  of 
that  of  human  beings.  To  travel  the  length  and 
breadth  of  a troop’s  territory  would  require  a 
minimum  trip  of  about  three  miles  and  rarely 
as  much  as  nine  miles. 

Baboon  troops  are  reported  to  occupy  two 
to  fifteen  square  miles  (DeVorc  and  Hall, 
*965);  gorillas,  ten  to  fifteen  (Schaller,  1965); 
and  chimpanzees  six  to  twenty  (Goodall, 

1965)- 

Gorilla  troop  size  has  been  reported  at  two 
to  thirty  individuals  (Schaller,  1965);  chim- 
panzees at  twenty  to  thirty  (Reynolds,  1963); 
and  baboons,  thirteen  to  185  at  Amboseli 
(DeVore  and  Washburn,  1963);  and  twelve 
to  750  in  Ethiopia  (Kummer  and  Kurt,  1963). 

4.  Group  composition.  Conflicting  data  on 
group  composition  probably  reflect  differences 
among  troops  observed  rather  than  errors  of 
reporting,  although  distinction  between  troops 
may  be  difficult  in  densely  populated  areas  and 
identification  of  individual  members  requires 
familiarity  with  the  group.  In  addition,  troops 
on  game  reserves  such  as  that  adjoining 
Nairobi,  which  is  visited  by  hundreds  of  tourists 
daily,  are  not  truly  in  a state  of  nature. 

There  is  unanimity  that  mature  males  and 
females  do  not  form  permanent  attachments, 
orangs  possibly  excepted.  Male  dominance  and 
dimorphism  are  strong  among  the  more  terres- 
trial primates,  which  may  be  a function  of 
sexual  competition  for  the  females  and  of  the 
need  to  protect  the  troop  against  predators 
rather  than  against  other  troops.  Whether  a 
troop  consists  of  a single  dominant  male  and 


several  females  and  immature  animals,  whether 
it  includes  several  “harems,”  or  whether  there  is 
a hierarchy  of  dominance,  or  pecking  order, 
seems  to  vary  with  the  troops  observed.  Compa- 
rable male  dominance  cannot  be  assumed  for  all 
hominid  societies,  because  sexual  roles  are 
determined  more  by  cultural  functions  that  by 
physical  strength,  and  the  female  reproductive 
functions  preclude  some  activities  women  might 
otherwise  carry  out. 

Effects  of  Cultural  Factors 

The  general  effects  of  cultural  factors  added  to 
biological  potentials  bring  cultural  ecological 
adaptations  into  sharp  focus.  Human  bipeds 
may  range  at  least  twenty  to  thirty  miles,  and 
with  certain  transportation  devices  they  may 
cover  several  hundred  miles.  Means  of  collect- 
ing, hunting  transporting,  and  preparing  foods 
vastly  augment  man’s  subsistence  basis.  Pri- 
mary human  subsistence  groups  are  little  larger 
than  those  of  the  apes,  but  specialized  functions 
in  subsistence  and  child  rearing  have  set  lower 
limits  on  social  groups,  while  exploitation  of  a 
wider  environment  and  the  kind  of  transporta- 
tion have  set  upper  limits.  In  all  ethnographic 
cases,  cultural  complementarity  is  the  basis  of 
the  nuclear  family,  and,  because  this  involves 
marriage  proscriptions  and  preferences,  kin- 
ship relations  extend  from  one  minimal  or 
primary  group  to  another,  their  nature  being 
determined  by  ecological  adaptations  and  their 
limits  by  the  size  of  the  maximum  group. 

Cultural  devices  have  also  permitted  oc- 
cupation of  higher  latitudes,  which  non- 
hominids  and  early  hominids  probably  could 
occupy  only  during  warm  interstadial  periods 
(see  Carpenter,  1942,  pp.  303-31 1). 

In  analyzing  the  various  social  responses  to 
ecological  factors,  it  is  convenient  to  start  with 
the  irreducible  social  unit,  the  family,  although 
social  evolution  almost  certainly  began  with 
such  larger  aggregates  as  a pre-hominid  troop. 
Since  the  nuclear  family  is  the  focal  point  of 
all  kinship  analysis,  it  is  important  to  ascertain 
the  factors  that  underlie  it. 

1.  The  nuclear  family.  Although  a nuclear 
family — a minimal  unit  of  father,  mother,  and 
children — is  basic  to  all  ethnographic  cases,  it 
may  not  have  existed  in  early  periods.  The 
family  among  hunters  and  gatherers  is  based 


Steward  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies 


on  strong  sexual  complementarity,  men  being 
primarily  hunters  and  women  carriers  of  wood 
and  water,  seed  collectors,  camp  keepers,  and 
child  tenders.  Unproductive  as  hunting  may 
be  in  certain  areas,  it  nonetheless  gives  men  a 
distinctive  and  important  subsistence  role  and 
was  presumably  the  principal  factor  that 
created  the  nuclear  family.  If  the  early  homi- 
nids  were  not  hunters,  their  family  may  have 
been  matrifocal  in  that  it  consisted  of  females 
and  immature  offspring.  Food  collecting,  as  far 
as  we  know,  does  not  create  a sexual  division 
of  labor,  for  it  is  carried  out  by  both  sexes  in 
the  same  way. 

Hunting  of  large  game  is  clearly  implied  by 
Upper  Paleolithic  sites  in  Europe,  and  it  was 
undoubtedly  the  special  task  of  men,  wherein 
masculine  strength  was  probably  less  important 
than  hunting  devices  and  the  considerable  time 
spent  away  from  the  family.  Fishing  and  aqua- 
tic hunting  would  have  similar  effects.  Whether 
comparable  specialization  by  the  male  was 
required  to  obtain  large  game  during  the  lower 
Paleolithic  is  wholly  conjectural,  for  hunting 
methods  are  unknown.  Scavenging,  if  prac- 
ticed, probably  did  not  require  special  mascu- 
line activities,  while  hunting  small  animals 
cannot  have  imposed  activities  on  men  similar 
to  those  ofl  arge  game  hunting.  Net  hunting  of 
rabbits  among  the  Great  Basin  people,  for 
example,  involved  women  and  children  along 
with  men. 

Although  it  is  now  impossible  to  date  the 
appearance  of  the  nuclear  family,  the  assump- 
tion that  it  is  based  on  cultural  complemen- 
tarity rather  than  on  some  inherent  or 
“natural”  tendency  means  that  it  may  be 
weakened.  This  is  happening  today,  especially 
in  certain  economically  depressed  segments  of 
society  where  males  form  such  loose  and 
transient  unions  with  females  that  the  stable 
social  unit  is  the  women  and  children,  which 
has  been  designated  the  “matrifocal  family.” 
Sexual  complementarity  has  also  been  de- 
creasing for  many  reasons  in  nuclear  families 
of  all  segments  of  Western  society. 

2.  The  minimum  or  primary  band.  Completely 
isolated  nuclear  families  are  very  exceptional, 
for  clusters  of  several  families  provide  greater 
security.  This  symposium  has  made  it  strik- 
ingly clear,  however,  that  many  of  the  larger 
aggregates,  which  were  formerly  designated 


331 

bands,  are  composed  of  smaller  groups  and 
sometimes  of  intermediate  but  very  fluid 
groups.  Since  relations  that  begin  with  the 
nuclear  family  are  of  major  importance  to  the 
minimum  group,  even  though  they  extend 
beyond  it,  it  is  convenient  to  consider  these 
first.  Variations  are  clearly  related  to  the  major 
factors  previously  discussed,  although  space 
prevents  adequate  analysis  of  some  of  the 
problems  raised  by  comparisons  of  marriage 
and  kinship  systems. 

Except  for  those  areas  of  abundant  subsis- 
tence, special  transportation,  and  permanent 
villages,  the  minimum  group  as  exemplified  by 
Australians,  Athapaskans,  Bushmen,  Hadza, 
Western  Shoshoni  and  probably  many  others 
is  very  close  to  Birdsell’s  model  of  25  persons, 
although  there  is  great  seasonal  variation  and 
change  over  periods  of  years.  (The  patrilineal 
band  discussed  below  is,  however,  somewhat 
larger.)  This  approximate  size  is  maintained, 
despite  population  densities  that  range  from 
one  person  to  one  or  two  square  miles  to  one 
per  forty  or  fifty  square  miles,  because  of  the 
effect  of  transportational  devices  other  than 
human  carriers  in  some  areas  and  because 
groups  may  be  restricted  in  their  range  in 
other  areas,  concentrating,  for  example,  near 
water  or  special  resources. 

I have  designated  these  “primary  bands” 
because  they  are  connected  most  closely  with 
subsistence,  but  other  terms  such  as  “special 
task  groups”  have  been  used. 

Although  the  kinship  structure  of  primary 
bands  depends  upon  several  factors,  all  consist 
of  closely  related  families.  Food  collecting  can 
rarely  be  cooperative,  but,  as  Rose  points  out 
in  the  case  of  Australia,  child  tending  becomes 
a particularly  important  function.  In  the  case 
of  hunters,  cooperation  by  a number  of  men  is 
common,  and  the  kill  is  ordinarily  shared. 

Multifamily  primary  bands.  Owing  to  expect- 
able fluctuations  in  the  size  of  primary  bands, 
a strongly  patterned  cultural  ideal  of  band 
composition  would  be  difficult  to  maintain, 
except  where  factors  making  for  a unilineal 
tendency  become  reinforced  by  myths  or  other 
fictions  of  descent.  Composition  of  the  primary 
band  therefore  varies,  although  its  core  is  a 
number  of  intermarried  families. 

Among  the  Western  Shoshoni,  the  primary 
group  consisted  of  several  families  related 


332  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

through  multiple  marriages — brother  and  sister 
to  sister  and  brother  or  brothers  to  sisters — and 
reinforced  by  the  levirate  and  sororate.  Be- 
cause members  of  such  small  clusters  of  families 
soon  become  consanguinally  as  well  as  affinally 
interrelated,  these  clusters  were  interlinked 
through  a network  of  marriages  that  extended 
territorially  to  the  limits  of  natural  barriers. 
These  local  groups  were  not,  as  Service  be- 
lieves (1962),  patrilocal  bands,  a fact  supported 
by  unpublished  ethnohistorical  data  (Steward, 
1953).  In  southern  Nevada  and  the  Death 
Valley  area,  the  lower  altitudes,  great  aridity, 
sparse  resources,  and  widely  spaced  springs 
isolated  Southern  Paiute  groups  to  the  degree 
of  restricting  the  marriage  network  (Steward, 
1938),  and  the  same  pattern  seems  to  have 
prevailed  among  the  Southern  Paiute  of  Utah 
(Kelly,  1964). 

The  primary  unit  or  band  is  very  similar  in 
composition  among  the  northern  Athapaskans. 
There  has  been  semantic  confusion  regarding 
my  statement  (1936)  that  these  bands  could 
marry  endogamously  because  they  consisted 
of  unrelated  families.  These  bands  contrast  to 
patrilineages  in  that  each  had  some  consan- 
guinally unrelated  families.  This  is  obviously 
true  of  Morice’s  large  bands,  which  seem  to  be 
the  same  as  Helm’s  “regional  bands,”  and  it 
is  also  true  of  Helm’s  “local  bands,”  according 
to  her  genealogies.  In  the  two  Dogrib  bands 
described,  many  families  were  related  consan- 
guinally through  parents  and  children  and 
through  siblings,  but  there  were  also  members 
related  only  affinally.  After  marriage  all  band 
members  became  affinals  but  not  all  were  con- 
sanguines.  Presumably,  many  of  the  spouses 
were  drawn  from  other  local  bands.  Unlike  the 
Shoshoni,  however,  there  were  few  cases  of 
multiple  marriage  ties  between  two  families. 

From  Helm’s  data  I gather  that  trapping 
and  fishing  are  far  more  important  to  the  local 
band  than  I had  previously  recognized.  In 
modern  times,  at  least,  this  apparently  affected 
post-marital  residence  in  unpredictable  ways, 
for  siblings  of  both  sexes  often  remained  with 
their  parents’  group,  although  consanguinal 
barriers  would  force  many  to  marry  elsewhere. 
Group  composition  among  the  Bushmen  (Lee, 
1965)  seems  also  to  be  based  on  multiple  mar- 
riage between  families  that  extended  through- 
out the  maximum  band  of  430  persons.  Further 


comparisons  of  group  composition  would  re- 
quire extended  genealogical  comparisons,  but 
Australia  has  special  interest. 

If  the  primary  Australian  band  is  only  some 
25  to  40  persons  and  these  bands  are  widely 
separated  in  arid  areas,  the  imposition  of  exo- 
gamous  clans  and  moieties  might  restrict  the 
number  of  potential  marriage  partners  to  an 
impossible  extent.  Some  of  the  marriage  classes 
or  sections  may  historically  be  a combination 
of  patrilineal  and  matrilineal  moieties.  Viewed 
in  terms  of  generations,  this  would  place  indi- 
viduals of  alternate  generations  in  the  same 
class.  If  however  the  tendency  toward  so-called 
gerontocracy  is  included  and  consanguinity  is 
redefined,  enough  marriages  are  possible,  es- 
pecially between  widely  differing  age  groups. 
A possible  means  of  clarifying  this  situation  is 
the  use  of  algebraic  descriptions  of  marriage 
systems  (for  example,  Reid,  1967). 

Lineage  based  bands.  The  primary  band  has 
undoubtedly  been  a lineage  when  stochastically 
predictable  circumstances  have  produced  only 
sons  or  daughters  for  two  generations,  but  this 
implies  no  ideal  pattern.  In  other  cases,  specific 
factors  may  create  tendencies  toward  a lineage, 
but  this  too  does  not  become  fixed.  Woodburn 
(Chapter  1 1,  this  volume)  describes  the  Hadza 
of  Tanzania  as  matrilineal  and  matrilocal,  with 
qualifications;  the  bands,  which  average 
eighteen  persons  and  are  attached  to  larger 
encampments  up  to  a hundred  persons,  are 
highly  unstable.  A dominance  of  food  collect- 
ing over  hunting,  wherein  less  than  half  the 
men  hunt  and  these  do  so  individually  and 
ineffectively,  may  be  a partial  explanation. 

Patrilineal  bands.  This  is  a more  clear-cut 
type,  and  although  my  earlier  formulation  of 
the  factors  producing  it  (1936)  have  been 
doubted  by  some  persons;  others,  including 
Birdsell,  who  takes  his  model  from  Australia, 
and  Williams,  on  the  basis  of  the  Birhor,  have 
made  it  the  general  model  of  all  food  hunters 
and  collectors.  There  are  several  possible 
sources  of  confusion  about  the  patrilineal  band. 

First,  the  factor  of  hunting  may  have  lost 
importance  with  the  reduction  of  game  in  the 
last  four  or  five  decades.  Schapera  (1926, 
1930)  and  the  sources  on  which  he  based  his 
description  of  the  Bushmen  may  have  been 
correct  for  an  earlier  period,  although,  as  Lee 
( 1965)  notes,  the  quantity  of  game  in  the  area 


Steward  Causal  Factors  and  Processes  in  the  Evolution  of  Pre-farming  Societies  333 

has  decreased  and  Bantu  have  brought  herds  The  factors  that  explain  the  patrilineal  band 


into  a portion  of  the  IKung  Bushman  territory. 
The  same  is  doubtless  true  of  many  areas,  al- 
though assumptions  about  the  game  population 
must  be  made  cautiously.  It  has  recently  been 
estimated  that  the  total  deer  population  of  the 
United  States  today  is  greater  than  in  abori- 
ginal times,  although  its  distribution  is  not  the 
same,  whereas  bison  now  number  but  a frac- 
tion of  that  of  pre-Columbian  times. 

Second,  during  early  periods  of  ethnographic 
exploration  many  writers  undoubtedly  took 
structural  types  found  in  limited  regions  to  be 
representative  of  large  areas  or  continents. 
This  does  not  necessarily  invalidate  what  they 
observed,  but  it  is  expectable  that  in  a continent 
as  varied  as  Australia  Radcliffe-Brown’s 
“horde”  would  not  occur  everywhere. 

Third,  where  the  patrilineal  band  is  reported 
it  seems  too  large  for  a patrilineage  based  on 
known  genealogy.  If  ancestry  were  not  known 
beyond  five  generations,  a group  of  twenty-five 
or  thirty  persons  might  continue  to  practice 
exogamy  but  their  patrilineal  consanguinity 
would  become  untraceable.  These  bands, 
however,  are  reported  at  thirty  to  150  persons. 
In  the  absence  of  a strong  genealogical  sense, 
the  fiction  of  relationship  between  all  members 
could  be  perpetuated  by  myths  of  descent, 
which  I believe  were  present  among  all  the 
patrilineal  bands  previously  described  (Ste- 
ward, 1936).  In  this  case,  we  can  accept  as 
descriptive  of  a strong  tendency  the  accounts 
of  Gusinde  (1931-39;  also,  Baer  and  Schitz, 
1965)  for  the  Ona,  Radcliffe-Brown  (1931)  for 
at  least  some  Australians,  Schebesta  (1929, 
1931)  for  the  Congo  and  Malayan  Negritos, 
Roth  (1890)  for  the  Tasmanians,  and  Strong 
(1929a)  for  the  southern  California  Shos- 
honeans. 

The  importance  of  the  hunter’s  familiarity 
with  his  country  is  questioned  by  Williams  on 
the  basis  of  the  Birhor  of  India  who  have 
patrilineal  bands.  The  Birhor,  however,  are 
very  distinctive  in  that  they  mainly  hunt  hares 
by  means  of  nets  for  trade  to  neighboring 
peoples  for  rice.  The  Shoshoni  hunt  rabbits  in 
the  same  way  and  need  only  to  know  where 
the  animals  are  abundant.  Unlike  the  Birhor, 
who  were  not  self-sufficient  in  subsistence,  the 
Shoshoni  had  to  be  familiar  with  their  terrain 
to  obtain  other  foods. 


are  more  environmental  than  technological. 
Such  bands  occur  where  there  are  large,  highly 
mobile  animals  that  do  not  migrate  long  dis- 
tances, where  hunting  exceeds  collecting  in 
effort  and  sometimes  in  quantity,  where  popu- 
lation is  sparse,  and  where  transportation  is 
limited  to  human  carriers.  It  may  have  other 
preconditions  and  causes.  This  structure  is  the 
result  of  a strong  tendency  but,  for  reasons 
previously  particularized  (Steward,  1936),  not 
an  unalterable  pattern. 

The  Indians  of  the  Plains  exhibit  the  effects 
of  contrasting  factors.  The  vast  bison  herds 
made  food  collecting  secondary,  the  nature  of 
the  animals  was  such  that  highly  coordinated 
and  even  policed  hunts  were  carried  out  by 
large  numbers  of  men,  and  the  dog  travois  and 
packing  supplemented  human  carriers. 

3.  The  maximum  band.  This  is  the  group  of 
maximum  social  interaction,  which  Birdsell 
(1953)  designates  the  “dialectical  tribe”  and 
which  rarely  exceeds  500  persons.  Although 
such  groups  may  be  somewhat  integrated 
through  subsistence  activities,  they  are  based 
principally  on  similar  dialect,  intermarriage, 
visiting,  and  other  social  interactions  and,  un- 
like permament  communities,  are  not  strongly 
structured  and  rarely  have  leaders  of  any  im- 
portance. The  social,  cultural,  and  dialectical 
frontiers  of  such  bands  may  be  delimited  by 
distances  within  which  people  can  associate  or 
by  such  barriers  as  deserts,  lakes,  and  mountain 
ranges.  Devices  for  snow  travel  in  northern 
latitudes  and  greater  resource  density  in  lower 
latitudes  are  factors  that  permit  communica- 
tions within  the  bands. 

Not  all  maximum  bands,  however,  conform 
to  the  model  of  the  dialectical  tribe.  Owing  to 
unpredictability  of  resources,  the  annual  sub- 
sistence trek  among  the  Western  Shoshoni 
(Steward,  1938)  and  the  Alacaluf  of  the 
Chilean  archipelago  (Bird,  1946)  brings  family 
clusters  into  association  with  different  clusters 
from  year  to  year.  The  larger  network  of  social 
interaction,  therefore,  was  a series  of  inter- 
marriages that  extended  over  hundreds  of 
miles. 

Territoriality  and  warfare.  There  have  been 
many  contentions  that  primitive  bands  own 
territories  or  resources  and  fight  to  protect 
them.  Although  I cannot  assert  that  this  is 


334  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

never  the  case,  it  is  probably  very  uncommon. 
First,  the  primary  groups  that  comprise  the 
larger  maximum  bands  intermarry,  amalga- 
mate if  they  are  too  small  or  split  offif  too  large. 
Second,  in  the  cases  reported  here,  there  is  no 
more  than  a tendency  for  primary  groups  to 
utilize  special  areas.  Third,  most  so-called 
“warfare”  among  such  societies  is  no  more 
than  revenge  for  alleged  witchcraft  or  con- 
tinued interfamily  feuds.  Fourth,  collecting  is 
the  main  resource  in  most  areas,  but  I know  of 
no  reported  defense  of  seed  areas.  Primary 
bands  did  not  fight  one  another,  and  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  see  how  a maximum  band  could  as- 
semble its  manpower  to  defend  its  territory 
against  another  band  or  why  it  should  do  so. 
It  is  true  that  durian  trees,  eagle  nests,  and  a 
few  other  specific  resources  were  sometimes 
individually  claimed,  but  how  they  were  de- 
fended by  a person  miles  away  has  not  been 
made  clear. 

Defense  of  the  hunting  territories  of  patri- 
lineal bands  has  also  been  claimed,  but  this 
too  is  open  to  question.  Slain  animals  are 
owned  by  the  individual  or  group  of  hunters. 
Fishing  weirs,  dams,  and  other  constructions 
are  always  owned  by  their  builders,  and  the 
same  is  doubtless  true  of  pitfalls,  blinds,  corrals, 
and  the  like.  Whether  a band  defended  live 
game  within  a territory  against  other  bands 
with  which  it  intermarried  deserves  re- 
examination. 

Ethnographic  and  archeological  models.  An  ethno- 
graphic model  based  on  dialect,  stylistic 
features,  value  systems,  corporate  limits,  jural 


principles,  and  ritual  patterns  is  quite  useless 
and  unnecessary  for  archeology.  The  starting 
point  is  to  compare  the  special  purpose  en- 
campment of  a primary  band  with  a prehistoric 
site  where  the  same  factors  can  be  inferred. 
Larger  temporary  encampments  of  ethno- 
graphic cases  are  more  difficult  to  equate  with 
archeological  sites,  for  non-ecological  factors 
may  have  operated.  But  where  the  ethno- 
graphic and  archeological  sites  are  reasonably 
permanent,  factor  determination  of  the  pre- 
conditions of  such  sites  is  possible.  Sackett  has 
noted  that  Upper  Paleolithic  sites  seem 
generally  to  represent  more  permanent,  multi- 
purpose habitations  than  Mousterian  sites 
which  lack  evidence  of  the  full  hunting  com- 
plex and  has  suggested  that  the  functional 
nature  of  hunting  and  fishing  in  the  Upper 
Paleolithic  may  have  been  comparable  to  that  of 
the  Northwest  Coast.  If  the  Upper  Paleolithic 
people  had  some  of  the  transportational  devices 
known  among  modern  Arctic  societies,  nuclea- 
tion  of  populations  would  have  been  easier. 

As  for  Sackett’s  question  about  the  kind  of 
future  Paleolithic  research  needed,  I suggest 
that  in  addition  to  information  on  the  loca- 
tions and  on  the  depth  and  artifact  content  of 
sites,  it  is  important  to  estimate  the  relative 
quantities  of  fish  and  game,  to  speculate  about 
the  kinds  of  social  activities  that  were  required 
in  hunting  both  mature  and  immature  animals 
of  different  species  with  the  methods  that  may 
have  been  used,  and  to  attempt  to  relate  the 
purpose  and  permanence  of  the  site  to  micro- 
environments of  different  resources. 


Discussions,  Part  VII 


35a.  Are  the 

Hunter-Gatherers  a Cultural  Type? 
Speakers:  DeVore,  Murdock,  Whiting 

Murdock  : I shall  confine  my  remarks  to  the 
area  of  social  organization.  My  interest  in 
hunters  is  twofold.  First,  in  comparative  work, 
using  the  cross-cultural  method  that  I employ, 
we  have  always  had  a great  deal  of  difficulty 
finding  enough  independent  cases  of  hunters. 
If  you  know  of  the  earlier  study  by  Hobhouse, 
Wheeler,  and  Ginsburg  (1961),  you  may  recall 
that  between  75  and  85  per  cent  of  all  their 
lower  hunters  were  Australians,  while  a similar 
precentage  of  their  higher  hunters  were  North 
American  Indians.  Of  course,  this  situation, 
statistically,  is  entirely  improper  today.  The 
problem  is  to  add  to  our  cases  of  hunting 
peoples,  and  that  has  been  done  here.  My 
second  interest  in  hunters  is  shared  by  many 
of  you.  We  are  interested  in  contemporary 
hunters  because  of  the  light  they  may  shed  on 
the  behavior  of  Pleistocene  man.  This  does  not 
mean  that  any  hunting  society  today  resembles 
one  in  the  Pleistocene.  But  to  whatever  limited 
extent  we  are  to  understand  Pleistocene  man 
by  evidence  other  than  archeological  remains, 
we  need  the  widest  possible  range  of  cultural 
variations  to  indicate  the  possibilities  for  ad- 
justments that  presumably  occurred  during 
the  Pleistocene. 


The  new  contributions  to  the  literature  on 
hunter-gatherers  made  at  this  symposium 
seem  to  me  to  aid  in  the  clarification  of  a whole 
super-type  of  culture  that  I had  not  really 
understood  before  I came.  June  Helm’s  paper 
comparing  Dogrib,  !Kung,  and  Nambikwara 
shows  us  the  remarkable  similarities  among  the 
three.  Looking  back  on  the  27  hunting  societies 
covered  in  my  conference  paper,  I come  to  the 
conclusion  (leaving  aside  the  Australian  ones 
for  the  moment)  that  there  is  a surprisingly 
narrow  range  of  variation  in  hunting  and 
gathering  cultures  with  regard  to  social  organi- 
zation. The  two  universal  human  social  group- 
ings— nuclear  family  and  local  community — 
stand  out  clearly  in  all  the  hunter-gatherer 
societies.  The  nuclear  is  less  frequently 
swamped  by  larger  types  of  family  organization 
among  hunter-gatherers  than  is  elsewhere  the 
case.  There  is  a strikingly  uniform  division  of 
labor  in  hunter-gatherer  societies.  The  women 
gather;  the  men  hunt.  And — something  that 
has  not  been  brought  out — when  these  societies 
fish,  the  men  manage  the  more  complex 
techniques;  while  the  women  do  basketry, 
fishing,  gather  shellfish,  etc.  Now,  this  neatness 
of  the  division  of  labor  is  far  more  uniform  than 
one  finds  among  many  other  types  of  societies, 
say  agricultural  ones  in  general. 

With  the  exception  of  the  Australians,  there 
is  no  case  of  rigid  unilocal  rules  of  residence 
among  hunter-gatherers.  There  is  some  type 


335 


336  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

of  ambilocal  residence,  in  which  often  viri- 
and  uxorilocal  residence  is  of  about  equal 
occurence.  This  is  a part  of  the  adaptability 
of  hunters  that  has  been  pointed  out  in  other 
contexts.  Descent  is  rarely  unilineal.  Some  of 
the  Athabaskans,  some  of  the  California 
Indians,  some  of  the  Northeastern  Algonkians, 
a few  of  the  Apache,  and  possibly  the  Vedda 
are  unilineal  to  a considerable  degree.  But 
clearly  the  general  picture  is  similar  to  that 
for  residence,  as  regards  flexibility. 

Polygyny  occurs  among  hunter-gatherers, 
but  it  rarely  reaches  the  extremes  reached  in 
some  unilineal  societies,  particularly  patrilineal 
ones.  Extended  families  of  one  type  or  another 
appear  quite  frequently,  but  they  never  cause 
the  nuclear  family  to  lose  its  distinctive 
features.  Exogamy  is  particularly  universal 
among  hunters-gatherers.  So  in  general  there 
is  a rather  restricted  distribution  curve  in  the 
main  elements  of  their  social  organization — 
except  for  the  Australians! 

Now,  the  Australians  are  not  only  unilinear, 
but  they  are  also  largely  characterized  by 
double  descent.  Their  residence  rules  are  over- 
whelmingly patrilocal.  They  have  polygyny  in 
a more  developed  form  than  other  hunter- 
gatherers.  Without  the  example  of  the  Aus- 
tralians, we  might  agree  that  Lowie  was  right 
when  he  postulated  a bilateral  type  of  society 
with  a prominent  nuclear  family  as  necessarily 
the  earliest  form  of  human  social  organization. 
The  Australian  evidence,  however,  makes  this 
seem  dubious.  I suggest  that  we  recognize  the 
near  uniqueness  of  Australian  social  organiza- 
tion and  pay  more  attention  than  before  to 
attempts  to  explain  their  sharp  divergence  from 
similar  societies  elsewhere  in  the  world. 

Whiting:  I would  like  to  underline  Professor 
Murdock’s  comments  by  presenting  some  statis- 
tical data  comparing  hunters  and  gatherers 
with  societies  whose  subsistence  economy  is 
either  agricultural  or  pastoral  or  both.  Numer- 
ous times  in  this  conference  similarities  have 
emerged  between  groups  observed  in  very  diff- 
erent parts  of  the  world.  This  report  will,  I hope, 
confirm  most  of  these  strong  impressions  and 
at  the  same  time  highlight  those  characteristics 
that  are  peculiar  to  hunters  and  gatherers  and 
distinguish  them  as  a special  cultural  type. 

The  sample  upon  which  this  study  is  based 
consists  of  one  society  from  each  of  the  412 


culture  clusters  defined  by  Murdock  in  the 
Ethnographic  Atlas  (1967).  The  particular  society 
chosen  to  represent  each  cluster  was  the  one 
with  the  best  ethnographic  coverage  as  judged 
by  the  number  of  categories  coded  in  Tables 
A and  B of  the  Atlas.  If  two  or  more  societies  in 
a given  cluster  were  equal  in  coverage  the 
representative  was  chosen  by  lot. 

The  variables  coded  in  the  Ethnographic  Atlas 
were  then  converted  into  unidimensional  scalar 
variables  whenever  this  was  possible  (Whiting, 
1967).  One  of  these  codes  was  an  estimate  of 
the  relative  dependence  upon  hunting,  gather- 
ing, and  fishing.  This  estimate  was  obtained  by 
summing  the  scores  in  columns  7,  8,  and  9 of 
the  Atlas.  The  score  was  then  correlated 
(Pearson’s  r.)  with  each  of  the  remaining  86 
scalar  variables.  Nearly  half  of  the  resulting 
correlations  were  statistically  significant.  Since 
a correlation  coefficient  is  difficult  to  interpret, 
it  was  determined  to  make  a further  analysis  so 
that  the  results  could  be  presented  in  a more 
meaningful  way. 

To  do  this  we  chose  two  subsamples,  one  of 
which  consisted  of  more  or  less  pure  hunters 
and  gatherers  and  the  other  more  or  less  pure 
agriculturalists  and/or  pastoralists.  'I'his  could 
easily  be  done  on  the  basis  of  the  scalar  score 
for  subsistence  described  above.  If  on  the  basis 
of  the  score,  75  per  cent  of  a society’s  food 
supply  was  provided  by  foraging  (for  example, 
hunting,  gathering,  or  fishing),  it  was  placed  in 
the  “pure”  foraging  group.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  less  than  15  per  cent  of  the  food  supply  was 
provided  by  foraging  techniques  it  was  placed 
in  the  non-foraging  category.  This  procedure 
yielded  74  “pure”  foragers  and  99  “pure” 
non-foragers.  The  remaining  239  cases  were 
considered  mixed  and  omitted  from  this  analysis. 

The  geographic  distribution  of  these  two 
groups  is  shown  in  Table  1. 

The  geographic  bias  in  the  sample  is  unfor- 
tunate but  not  surprising.  It  might  have  been 
better  to  draw  separate  samples  for  the  Old 
and  the  New  World  as  Lee  has  done  (Chapter 
4,  this  volume).  This  was  not  done,  however, 
and  therefore  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that 
societies  from  North  and  South  America  con- 
tribute heavily  to  the  foragers  in  our  sample 
and  the  Circum-Mediterranean,  East  Eurasia 
and  Africa  are  over  represented  in  the  non- 
foraging group. 


Table  i Foragers  and.  Non-Foragers 

Distribution  by  region  of  the  sample  of  cultures  whose 
subsistence  economy  is  primarily  (over  75  per  cent) 
based  upon  hunting,  gathering,  and  fishing  and  those  in 
which  such  techniques  are  negligible,  contributing 
15  per  cent  or  less  to  subsistence. 


Foragers 

Mon- 

Foragers 

Africa 

4 

21 

Circum-Mediterranean 

0 

38 

East  Eurasia 

8 

23 

Insular  Pacific 

6 

9 

North  America 

42 

4 

South  America 

14 

4 

The  percentage  of  societies  in  each  group 
having  certain  characteristics  was  calculated 
and  is  listed  together  with  an  estimate  of  the 
statistical  significance  of  the  difference  between 
foragers  and  non-foragers  based  upon  x2  tests. 
Since,  as  Professor  Murdock  pointed  out,  the 
hunters  and  gatherers  in  Australia  seem  some- 
what atypical,  the  percentage  for  each  variable 
for  the  seven  Australian  cases  coded  in  the 
Atlas  have  also  been  listed  whenever  sufficient 
data  were  available.  Only  those  variables  that 
yielded  statistically  significant  results  in  the  first 
correlational  analysis  are  reported  on  this  test. 

It  is  worthwhile  to  comment  of  the  position 
of  the  Australian  tribes  as  shown  in  Table  2. 
In  some  respects  they  are  typical  foragers.  They 
have  small  nomadic  communities,  have  a pre- 
ference for  sororal  polygyny,  and  do  not  have 
a caste  system.  In  some  respects  they  stand 
intermediate  between  the  two  groups,  e.g., 
bride  price,  bride  service,  and  initial  uxorilocal 
residence.  They  are  more  like  the  non-foraging 
group  however,  in  that  their  final  residence  is 
virilocal,  descent  is  unilinear,  matrilateral 
cross-cousin  marriage  is  permitted,  and  initia- 
tion rites  with  genital  operations  are  performed. 
Statistical  evidence  thus  confirms  in  certain  res- 
pects the  observations  made  by  Murdock  and 
others  as  to  the  unique  position  of  the  Australian 
tribes  among  the  hunters  and  gatherers. 

In  order  that  one  not  be  misled  by  Table  2 
into  thinking  that  foragers  are  different  from 
non-foragers  in  every  respect,  it  should  be 
repeated  that  only  the  variables  that  showed  a 
significant  relationship  in  the  initial  correla- 
tional analysis  have  been  presented.  Some  of 
the  variables  that  showed  no  differences  were 


Discussions,  Part  VII  337 

the  degree  of  polygyny  (rather  than  the  type), 
extended  versus  nuclear  families,  games  of 
chance,  and  type  of  succession  to  local  office. 

I would  also  like  to  comment  on  differences 
in  child  rearing  between  foragers  and  non- 
foragers. The  data  on  child-rearing  practices 
are  not  available  for  the  sample  used  above, 
but  some  interesting  results  are  reported  in  a 
study  by  Barry,  Child,  and  Bacon  (1959)  on  a 
similar  sample.  Judgments  were  made  on  the 
degree  to  which  parents  put  pressure  on  their 
children  to  be  compliant,  e.g.,  achieving,  self- 
reliant,  and  independent.  Of  the  22  foraging 
cultures  in  their  sample,  19,  or  86  per  cent, 
stressed  assertiveness  more  than  compliance. 
By  contrast,  34  of  the  39  cultures  whose 
economy  was  primarily  based  on  agriculture 
and/or  animal  husbandry  stressed  compliance 
over  assertiveness.  They  argue  that  this  dif- 
ference is  a consequence  of  differences  in  the 
accumulation  of  economic  goods.  Cattle  and 
cultivated  fields  are  part  of  the  establishment 
which  must  be  cared  for  responsibly  and 
obediently  according  to  rules  set  by  the  older 
generation.  The  successful  forager,  however, 
with  no  accumulation  to  protect,  should  be 
assertive  and  independent  and  is  so  trained  as 
a child. 

On  the  basis  of  a detailed  study  of  child 
rearing  (B.  Whiting,  1963),  it  was  noted  that 
in  societies  with  large  animals  and  no  fences, 
children  were  generally  assigned  the  task  of 
herd  boys,  which  is  a task  requiring  a high 
degree  of  both  obedience  and  responsibility. 
By  contrast  among  hunters  and  gatherers, 
there  are  no  tasks  that  substantially  contribute 
to  the  economy  and  are  appropriate  for  young 
children.  I would  judge  the  hunting  episode  of 
the  two  young  boys  that  we  saw  in  Woodburn’s 
Hadza  film  would  be  quite  typical.  The  boys 
were  hunting  for  their  own  pleasure  rather  than 
carrying  out  a task  assigned  by  their  elders.  If 
they  failed,  they  would  almost  certainly  not  be 
punished  for  it.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a herd 
boy  should  let  his  animals  get  into  the  neigh- 
bor’s garden,  he  would  most  certainly  be 
severely  punished.  Perhaps  these  differences  in 
child  rearing  account  in  part  for  the  reluctance 
of  hunters  and  gatherers  to  change  their  ways 
and  become  part  of  the  modern  world. 

One  final  comment  should  be  made  with 
respect  to  the  effect  of  foraging  upon  children. 


338  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 


Table  2 Characteristics  of  Societies  in  Three  Groups 


Atlas 

Foragers 

Australians 

Non-Foragers 

r.  Value 

Column  No. 

r^~ 

II 

(« = 7) 

07 

II 

(Foragers 

Local  Community 

(Percentages) 

vs.  Non- 

Size 

3' 

— — ^ 

- -v 

foragers) 

Less  than  50 

47 

87 

5 

.0001 

50-99 

29 

0 

8 

.0001 

100  or  more 

24 

13 

87 

.0001 

Settled  Communities 

30 

7 

0 

84 

.0001 

House  Type: 

Curvilinear 

floor  plan 

80 

54 

— 

28 

.001 

Round  or  conical 

roof 

83 

54 

— 

35 

.02 

Exchange  at 

Marriages 

12 

Bride  price 

3<5 

57 

80 

.0001 

Bride  service 

23 

15 

2 

.0001 

Form  of  Marriage 

>4-15 

General  polygyny 

14 

15 

34 

.0001 

Sororal  polygyny 

22 

70 

0 

.0001 

Limited  polygyny 

47 

'5 

39 

.0001 

Monogamy 

18 

0 

27 

.0001 

Residence 

16-17 

Initially  uxorilocal 

27 

15 

10 

.001 

Finally  uxorilocal 

22 

0 

6 

.0001 

Finally  avunculocal 

4 

6 

1 

.0001 

Finally  virilocal 

56 

100 

79 

.0001 

Finally  ambilocal 

*5 

0 

3 

.0001 

Finally  neolocal 

3 

0 

8 

.0001 

Finally  natolocal 

0 

0 

3 

.0001 

Descent  Unilinear 

20-24 

27 

100 

67 

.0001 

Exogamous 

Communities 

>9 

43 

85 

25 

.024 

Cross-Cousin  Mar- 

riage Permitted 

26 

Matrilateral 

3i 

57 

54 

.005 

Patrilateral 

26 

■5 

49 

.005 

Presence  of  High 

Gods 

34 

37 

17 

83 

.0001 

Games 

35 

Physical  skill 

98 

75 

79 

.002 

Strategy 

0 

25 

62 

.0001 

Initiation  with  Genital 

Mutilation 

37-38 

6 

43 

20 

.024 

Caste 

69 

20 

0 

53 

.0001 

The  number  25-30  has  been  suggested  by 
several  people  as  the  typical  size  of  the  micro- 
band. With  such  a small  group  there  cannot 
be  enough  children  of  the  appropriate  age  to 
get  up  a game  of  football  or  baseball  even  if 
you  let  the  girls  play.  Although  I know  of  no 
data  on  the  subject,  I would  be  very  surprised 
if  there  were  many  competitive  team  sports 
among  the  hunters  or  gatherers — another 
reason  for  the  emphasis  on  individual  achieve- 
ment rather^  than  group  responsibility. 

DeVore:  It  is  banal  to  say  that  we  have 
raised  more  questions  than  we  have  answered ; 
yet  this  is  particularly  true  of  this  conference 
and,  indeed,  was  one  of  our  main  purposes  in 
organizing  it.  To  the  extent  that  we  can  still 
see  the  forest  despite  the  trees,  it  is  apparent 
that  it  is  a very  lush,  variegated,  tropical  rain- 
forest. Although  synthetic  statements  con- 
cerning hunter-gatherers  as  a “culture  type” 
may  now  seem  further  away  than  before,  I 
think  that  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  pass 
through  the  stage  of  critical  reexamination  re- 
presented by  this  conference.  There  were  overly 
simple  typologies  to  be  amended  and  unques- 
tioned generalizations  to  be  called  into  ques- 
tion and  exorcised.  Many  of  the  older  state- 
ments are  now  of  no  greater  value  to  us  than 
the  Pleistocene  “stages”  are  to  the  contem- 
porary archeologist. 

On  the  other  hand,  I am  not  yet  willing  to 
abandon  the  search  for  generalizations  that 
seem  to  apply  to  most  hunter-gatherers  most 
of  the  time.  To  try,  in  three  days’  time,  to 
range  over  a topic  so  broad  as  “man  the 
hunter” — a topic  which,  merely  in  terms  of 
geography,  took  us  from  the  high  arctic  to  the 
Kalahari  Desert  and  from  India,  to  South 
America,  to  Australia — makes  it  unlikely  that 
any  sweeping  generalizations  will  suddenly 
appear  from  the  data.  Indeed,  we  might  well 
be  suspicious  of  any  generalization  that  was 
intended  to  apply  to  all  men  who  have  ever 
hunted  in  any  place  or  at  any  time. 

35b.  Primate  Behavior  and 
tiie  Evolution  of  Aggression 

Speakers:  L.  Binford,  DeVore,  Freeman,  Gardner, 
Hamburg,  Schneider,  Turnbull,  Washburn, 
Williams,  Woodburn 


Discussions,  Part  VII  339 

Hamburg:  Let  me  start  by  asking  the  ques- 
tion: Why  should  one  take  an  interest  in 
ancient  hunting  and  gathering  societies,  if  one 
is  primarily  concerned  with  the  problems  of 
contemporary  man  (as  I am)?  It  is  because 
this  represents  such  a long  period  in  human 
evolution.  Presumably,  during  that  long 
period,  important  adaptive  characteristics  of 
Homo  sapiens  evolved.  The  environment  of  con- 
temporary man  is  based  on  very  recent  environ- 
mental changes.  So,  much  of  the  genetic  equip- 
ment of  contemporary  man  is  likely  to  have 
been  shaped  by  the  selective  pressures  of  the 
hunting  and  gathering  era. 

Similarly,  it  seems  to  me  likely  that  some 
prevalent  values  of  hunting  and  gathering 
societies  may  also  reflect  selection  pressures. 
And  I wonder  whether  some  of  the  values  that 
were  useful  in  solving  adaptive  problems 
during  the  hunting  and  gathering  era  may  still 
persist  in  the  face  of  very  recent  environmental 
changes.  What  conditions  would  favor  the 
persistence  of  values  that  were  adaptively  useful 
during  the  hunting  and  gathering  era?  I think 
these  would  have  a great  deal  to  do  with  some 
of  the  issues  that  Whiting  raised.  That  is,  if  the 
prevalent  values  have  such  adaptive  utility  that 
they  are  strongly  incorporated  into  the  concept 
of  self  by  means  of  reward  and  punishment, 
then  I should  think  that  these  orientations  and 
attitudes  would  not  be  easily  changed.  This  is 
particularly  true  if  one  adds  that  the  outcome 
of  the  early  shaping  procedure  is  ambiguous  in 
its  results  in  later  life,  which  is  likely  to  be  the 
case,  given  the  life  span  of  the  human. 

If  it  is  true  that  there  are,  in  contemporary 
man,  both  genetic  and  social  characteristics 
that  were  once  highly  adaptive  but  are  no 
longer  so,  then  man  in  his  present  environment 
might  be  said  to  have  something  of  a “carry- 
over” problem.  This  consideration  was  what 
first  led  me  to  an  interest  in  human  evolution. 
After  years  of  examining  biochemical  and 
physiological  correlates  of  psychological  stress 
in  man  and  finding  it  difficult  to  make  biologi- 
cal sense  of  these  responses  in  terms  of  the  con- 
temporary environment,  I began  to  wonder 
whether  they  might  make  more  sense  in  terms 
of  the  earlier  human  environment.  Of  course, 
at  this  level  of  analysis  one  must  also  consider 
a large  portion  ofgeneral  mammalian  evolution. 
This  is  along  the  general  lines  of  the  endocrine 


340  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

and  autonomic  changes  associated  with 
sudden  apprehension  or  concern,  changes  that 
go  in  the  direction  offacilitation  ofenergy  meta- 
bolism and  modifications  of  circulation  such 
that  increased  energy  expenditure  is  supported. 

Another  carry-over  problem  that  may  be 
more  important  is  that  having  to  do  with  the 
destructive  propensities  of  Homo  sapiens,  and 
I often  have  the  feeling  that  this  is  a hidden 
agenda  in  many  discussions  of  social  problems 
and  evolutionary  changes.  Specifically,  the 
question — which  can  be  a worrisome  one — is 
whether  we  have  carried  over  aggressive  pro- 
pensities that  were  highly  adaptive  in  earlier 
environments  but  are  now  highly  dangerous. 
We  should  understand  that  this  line  of  study 
leads  us  even  beyond  ancient  hunter-gatherers, 
back  to  Washburn’s  baseline  at  the  nonhuman 
primate  level.  There  are  several  lines  of  evi- 
dence that  show  something  about  the  biological 
mechanisms  through  which  aggressive  ten- 
dencies may  have  developed  in  earlier  pri- 
mates. In  the  first  place,  studies  of  essentially 
ground-living  Old  World  monkeys  (sum- 
marized in  the  volume  edited  by  DeVore, 
1965)  bring  up  certain  relevant  points.  There 
is  a great  deal  of  evidence  showing  rough-and- 
tumble  play  over  a number  of  years.  This 
recalls  Whiting’s  point  about  the  development 
of  attitudes  and  skills  in  play,  since  it  amounts 
to  the  practice  of  aggressive  behavior  over  a 
period  of  several  years.  They  develop  complex 
motor  skills  that  utilize  their  formidable  ana- 
tomy— the  great  canine  teeth  and  the  massive 
temporal  muscles.  In  these  species,  there  is 
marked  sexual  dimorphism  in  both  anatomy 
and  behavior.  The  adult  males  defend  the 
troop  and  regulate  internal  disputes. 

In  laboratory  experiments  in  recent  years, 
there  have  been  several  groups  that  show 
something  relevant  about  hormonal  influences 
on  brain  development.  In  rodents,  for  instance, 
several  groups  have  shown  that  treatment  of 
the  newborn  females  with  testosterone  results 
not  only  in  a shift  towards  male  copulatory 
behavior,  but  also  increases  aggressive  be- 
havior. More  recently,  Young,  Goy,  and 
Phoenix  have  extended  these  experiments  to 
rhesus  macaques  and,  rather  surprisingly,  the 
same  sorts  of  things  happened.  They  gave 
testosterone  to  pregnant  females  during  their 
second  quarter  of  pregnancy,  so  that  it  would 


influence  the  brain  development  in  the  fetus. 
And,  as  with  the  rodents,  this  shifted  the  be- 
havior of  female  offspring  toward  male  norms, 
particularly  in  the  matter  of  aggression.  And 
this  is  still  true  now  that  the  females  so  treated 
are  3 years  old.  Of  course  in  the  field  these 
females  would  get  badly  beaten  and  might  or 
might  not  remain  so  aggressive.  In  fact,  they 
might  turn  out  to  be  the  most  inhibited  and 
surly.  The  point  is  simply  that  the  hormonal 
influence  on  the  brain  is  by  no  means  indepen- 
dent of  the  social  influences  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  developing  infant. 

In  respect  to  this  very  long  period  of  hunting 
and  gathering  societies,  does  it  seem  likely  that 
selection  pressure  favoring  male  aggression  has 
eased  greatly  until  very  recently?  If  not,  then 
how  dangerous  is  our  present  situation.  In 
relation  to  hunter-gatherers,  one  point  made 
by  Washburn  a few  years  ago  and  elaborated 
more  recently  by  Campbell  has  been  the  very 
great  differences  in  the  territory  utilized  in  a 
year’s  time  by  present  hunter-gatherers,  as 
contrasted  with  living  nonhuman  primates. 
Now,  one  may  wonder  what  sorts  of  controls 
are  necessary  for  the  utilization  of  such  large 
territories,  especially  if  one  is  hunting  large 
mammals.  How  much  variation  on  strict  terri- 
toriality is  possible  if  one  is  still  to  accomplish 
this?  It  seems  to  me  that  the  need  for  some 
degree  of  effective  control  over  relatively  large 
areas  would  lead  to  tensions  between  groups, 
and  on  this  point  Turnbull  mentioned  the 
need  for  an  excess  of  space  to  minimize  con- 
flicts between  groups.  I was  surprised  to  hear 
that,  given  the  relative  unimportance  of  hunt- 
ing for  these  people.  Birdsell  suggests  that  the 
absence  of  territoriality  in  some  places  may  be 
explained  as  caused  by  the  disruption  resulting 
from  contact  with  Europeans.  This  seems  quite 
plausible  to  me;  although  I suspect  that  there 
is  still  a discernible  continuum  from  the 
strictest  territoriality  to  the  least  evident  mani- 
festations of  it.  In-group,  out-group  distinctions 
are  ubiquitous  in  modern  society,  and  I wonder 
whether  this  tendency  may  not  bear  some  rela- 
tion to  the  problems  of  the  hunting  and  gather- 
ing way  of  life.  In  closing,  I quote  Bill  Laugh- 
lin’s  statement : 

Hunting  is  the  master  behavior  pattern  for  the 
human  species.  It  is  the  organizing  activity  which 


integrated  the  morphological,  physiological, 
genetic,  and  intellectual  aspects  of  the  individual 
human  organisms  and  of  the  populations  that 
compose  our  single  species.  Hunting  is  a way  of 
life  (and  not  simply  a subsistence  technique), 
which  importantly  involves  commitments,  corre- 
lates, and  consequences  spanning  the  entire  bio- 
behavioral  continua  of  the  individual  and  of  the 
entire  species  of  which  he  is  a member.  Man 
evolved  as  a hunter ; he  spent  over  99  per  cent  of 
his  species’  history  as  a hunter;  and  he  spread  over 
the  entire  habitable  area  of  the  world  as  a hunter. 

Turnbull  : I am  bothered  by  the  assumption 
that  hunters  are  aggressive.  Although  I do  not 
know  the  Bushmen  or  the  Hadza,  I feel  that 
what  I have  to  say  is  probably  true  of  them  also. 
In  the  two  groups  known  to  me,  there  is  an 
almost  total  lack  of  aggression,  emotional  or 
physical,  and  this  is  borne  out  by  the  lack  of 
warfare,  feuding,  witchcraft,  and  sorcery. 

I am  also  not  convinced  that  hunting  is  itself 
an  aggressive  activity.  This  is  something  that 
one  must  see  in  order  to  realize;  the  act  of 
hunting  is  not  carried  out  in  an  aggressive 
spirit  at  all.  Due  to  the  consciousness  of  de- 
pleting natural  resources,  there  is  actually  a 
regret  at  killing  life.  In  some  cases,  this  killing 
may  even  bear  an  element  of  compassion.  My 
experience  with  hunters  has  shown  them  to  be 
very  gentle  people,  and  while  it  is  certainly 
true  that  they  lead  extremely  hard  lives,  this  is 
not  the  same  thing  as  being  aggressive. 

Williams:  Although  the  hunting  way  of  life 
comprises  99  per  cent  of  human  history,  we 
should  remember  Sahlins’  earlier  point  that 
throughout  this  period  man  has  been  a hunter 
among  hunters.  In  this  conference  however, 
we  have  dealt  with  peoples  as  they  are  today 
and — for  very  good  reasons — have  mostly 
avoided  guessing  what  they  would  be  as 
hunters  in  a universe  of  hunters.  The  matter  of 
aggression  is  a case  in  point.  The  Birhor  of 
today  are  not  violent;  they  are  more  “hapless” 
than  “harmless.”  But  if  they  were  no  longer  to 
be  an  enclave  minority  I think  no  one  could 
predict  how  this  would  affect  the  level  of 
aggression. 

Schneider:  If  Laughlin  is  correct,  then 
Turnbull  must  be  out  of  his  mind!  For  if 
hunting  is  the  master  mechanism  that  Laughlin 
says  it  is,  then  why  can’t  the  ethnographer  dis- 


Discussions,  Part  VII  341 

cern  any  sign  of  this  among  the  contemporary 
hunting  peoples? 

Gardner:  Is  it  not  possible  that  both  are 
correct?  Turnbull  cites  non-aggression  only 
among  refuge  area  groups.  There  is,  in  fact,  a 
pattern  of  aggression  avoidance  among  hunters 
and  gatherers  in  refuge  areas  but  there  is  a 
contrasting  pattern  of  aggression  (war,  com- 
petitiveness, etc.)  among  hunters  and  gatherers 
in  more  homogeneous  intercultural  environ- 
ments, such  as  the  Australians,  Andamanese, 
and  Ona.  Laughlin  is  talking  about  just  such 
complementary  peoples. 

All  hunting  peoples  have  neighbors,  but  not 
all  of  these  peoples  are  under  intercultural 
pressure  of  a sort  to  which  they  cannot  reply. 
This  distinction  is  possible. 

Turnbull:  Let  me  say  another  word  about 
my  contention  that  the  Pygmies  are  not  ag- 
gressive, an  opinion  similar  to  that  of  many 
people  who  have  worked  among  hunters.  I 
recognize  that  life  in  Pygmy  camp  is  far  from 
peaceful;  husbands  frequently  beat  up  their 
wives,  and  vice  versa.  Yet  such  outlets,  as  well 
as  the  explicit  concern  shown  for  avoiding 
aggression,  are  insurance  policies  against  ag- 
gression of  an  intended,  calculated  type — 
which  is  what  I take  to  be  the  definitive  com- 
ponent of  the  sort  of  aggression  that  Hamburg 
mentioned. 

Schneider  : The  point  I keep  trying  to  make 
is  that  it  is  not  yet  at  all  clear  that  hunting  is 
such  a distinctive  and  clearly  definable  way  of 
life  as  Laughlin  has  alleged  it  to  be.  It  seems 
to  me  that  the  points  Washburn  and  Laughlin 
are  discussing  are  of  such  general,  diffuse  signi- 
ficance that  it  is  hard  to  see  how  they  can  be 
said  to  fit  specifically  into  a hunting  frame.  I 
fail  to  see  any  distinctive  set  of  relationships 
making  up  a constellation  of  aggression  or  of 
man-animal  relations  that  are  specially  cen- 
tered around  hunting  peoples.  For  example, 
consider  the  Pueblos.  Do  we  want  to  call  them 
fundamentally  aggressive,  generally  aggressive, 
or  only  slightly  aggressive?  For  after  all,  Turn- 
bull’s descriptions  of  Pygmy  camps  sound  in 
some  respects  like  the  sort  of  thing  one  reads 
about  the  Pueblos.  Comparisons  such  as  this 
undermine  the  delineation  of  “the  hunting 
way  of  life”  as  a clear-cut  phenomenon. 

F’inally,  I have  noticed  that  all  the  excep- 
tional and  special  cases  havebeen  characterized 


342  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

as  living  in  refuge  areas.  But  all  of  us  are  in 
refuge  areas  in  this  life,  and  surely  every  group 
has  been  exposed  at  some  time  or  another  to 
other  peoples.  So  the  idea  that  we  must,  unfor- 
tunately, look  at  some  peoples  as  “enclave 
minorities”  seems  to  recall  the  myth  of  the 
natural  man.  There  are  many  different  kinds 
of  settings,  but  I do  not  see  any  radical  dicho- 
tomy to  be  made  in  them. 

Washburn:  I would  like  to  turn  to  another 
matter  and  question  the  assumption  that 
scavenging  is  an  easy  or  necessary  stage  in 
human  evolution.  In  the  first  place,  all  of  the 
information  that  we  have  on  primate  hunting 
— GoodalPs  material  on  chimpanzees  (Goodall, 
1965;  Goodall  and  von  Lawick,  1965), 
DeVore’s  on  baboons  (DeVore  and  Hall, 
1 9^5 ; Washburn  and  DeVore,  1961),  Stru- 
hasaker’s  on  vervets  (Struhsaker,  1967),  and 
Carpenter’s  on  gibbons  (Carpenter,  1941)  — 
suggest  that  these  animals  will  take  eggs, 
young  birds,  and  other  small,  living  creatures, 
but  that  they  do  not  scavenge.  The  evidence 
shows  that  hunting  small,  easily  captured  prey 
is  far  simpler  and  more  nearly  universal  than 
is  scavenging.  Besides,  scavenging  from  large 
carcasses  when  carnivores  are  nearby  can  be 
exceedingly  difficult.  A scavenger  must  want 
meat  very  much  to  try  for  it  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, and  he  must  be  able  to  appraise 
and  cope  with  the  situation.  It  is  said  that  it  is 
easy  to  drive  a lion  from  its  kill,  but  this  is  only 
true  in  areas  where  lions  are  accustomed  to 
being  hunted  and  are  trained  to  stay  away  from 
man. 

Finally,  scavenged  meat  is  ofrare  occurrence 
by  comparison  with  meat  that  is  easy  to  hunt. 
In  an  area  in  Africa  in  which  there  are  many 
lions,  there  are  still  hundreds  of  baboon  per 
lion;  so  that  if  the  baboons  were  to  try  to  live 
on  scavenged  meat,  they  would  have  a hard 
time  getting  an  ounce  of  meat  per  day  per 
baboon.  The  most  minimal  hunting  of  easily 
killed  animals  is  more  rewarding  than  this. 

Woodburn:  I think  Professor  Washburn 
may  perhaps  be  understating  the  importance 
of  scavenging.  The  Hadza,  living  in  an  area  at 
least  as  rich  in  both  predatory  and  herbivorous 
animals  as  anywhere  else  in  the  world  where 
hunters  and  gatherers  survive,  often  obtain 
meat  by  scavenging.  The  meat  is  located  by 
watching  the  movements  of  vultures  flying 


overhead.  The  interpretation  of  the  movements 
of  vultures  is  very  skilled;  using  this  method, 
carcasses  of  animals  can  be  located  up  to  per- 
haps three  miles  away.  Very  often  Hadza 
camps  are  built  high  in  the  rocks  overlooking 
the  plains  and,  while  sitting  about  in  camp, 
men  keep  their  eyes  open  both  for  animals  to 
hunt  and  for  vultures  to  lead  them  to  dead 
animals.  They  eat  the  meat  of  animals  that 
have  died  by  themselves  as  well  as  those  killed 
by  predators. 

The  Hadza  do  drive  predators  off  the  carcass 
of  an  animal  without  any  hesitation.  I have 
myself  seen  lions,  leopards,  and  wild  dogs 
chased  away.  Admittedly  the  Hadza  possess 
powerful  bows  and  arrows  which  they  do  not 
hesitate  to  use  and  certainly  Paleolithic  man 
may  have  had  more  difficulty.  But  I am  in- 
clined to  believe  that  even  the  simple  equip- 
ment of  at  least  some  types  of  Paleolithic  man 
may  have  been  enough.  The  dangers  of  wild 
animals  have,  I believe,  been  vastly  exag- 
gerated particularly  by  European  hunters.  The 
Hadza  hunt  lion,  leopard,  rhinoceros,  and 
buffalo,  all  with  bow  and  arrow.  They  do  not 
hunt  elephant,  but  they  constantly  wander 
through  country  in  which  elephant  abound. 
Yet  within  living  memory  only  one  adult 
Hadza  has  been  killed  by  any  of  these  animals. 
Two  children  have  been  taken  by  leopards  at 
night. 

DeVore:  I see  no  necessary  contradiction 
between  these  two  points  of  view.  Homo  sapiens 
is  clearly  capable  of  scavenging  meat  as  a 
supplement  to  his  diet,  but  this  not  equivalent 
to  the  situation  confronting  the  smaller  Aus- 
tralopithecines,  with  their  cruder  tools.  The 
issue  is  whether  scavenging  on  a regular  basis 
constituted  a stage  in  the  evolution  of  hunting 
behavior  prior  to  the  skilled  hunting  of  lone 
prey.  I agree  with  Washburn  that  the  evidence 
argues  strongly  against  such  a stage. 

Freeman:  I am  intrigued  by  one  statement 
in  Professor  Steward’s  conference  paper  in 
which  the  subhuman  primate  family,  as  an 
evolutionary  stage,  is  defined  as  a biologically 
based  matrifocal  family.  The  subhuman  pri- 
mate family,  he  suggests,  might  have  charac- 
terized a phase  of  primate  social  organization 
prior  to  the  development  of  the  nuclear  family. 
It  is  my  understanding  that  this  stage  of  organi- 
zation was  defined  largely  on  the  basis  of 


observations  of  modern  nonhuman  primate 
communities,  so  I should  like  to  ask  Professor 
DeVore  to  comment  on  this  formulation.  Since 
we  now  have  studies  of  groups  as  diverse  in 
social  behavior  as  say,  baboons  and  gorillas,  is 
there  a sense  in  which  it  is  useful  to  call  the 
basic  unit  of  nonhuman  primate  social  organi- 
zation a matrifocal  family?  Is  such  an  organi- 
zation important  in  economic  activities  or  for 
purposes  of  defense  ? 

DeVore:  With  the  large  number  of  primate 
field  studies,  a wide  variety  of  forms  of  social 
organization  is  beginningjo  emerge.  It  would 
be  unfortunate  to  thinkitof  the  organization  of 
primate  society  only  in  terms,  say,  of  baboons, 
since  we  now  know  that  in  the  Old  World 
primates  alone  the  kinds  of  social  organization 
range  from  isolated  individuals,  mated  pairs 
with  offspring,  troops,  one-male  groups,  and 
so  on  to  a very  loose  aggregation  in  species  like 
the  chimpanzee. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  something  else 
is  becoming  evident.  Many  of  you  have  read 
the  work  of  Jane  von  Lawick-Goodall  (Goodall, 
1965)  and  seen  the  films  by  her  husband 
(Goodall  and  von  Lawick,  1965;  von  Lawick 
and  von  Lawick-Goodall,  1966).  What  strikes 
me  in  these — especially  in  the  recent  films — is 
the  extraordinary  degree  to  which  the  offspring 
continue  to  be  attached  to  the  mother  well  into 
young  adult  life.  What  one  finds,  then,  is  not 
a band  or  troop  or  organized  group  in  any 
monkey  sense,  but  a great  many  older  females 
surrounded  by  immature  offspring — up  to  as 
many  as  four,  including  young  adult  males. 
This  persistent  bond  between  mother  and  off- 
spring can  also  be  very  important  in  at  least 
some  species  of  monkeys.  As  a result  of  long- 
term studies  at  the  Japan  Monkey  Centre 
(Kawamura,  1958;  Washburn  et  al.,  1965)  and 
on  Cayo  Santiago  (e.g.  Sade,  1965),  we  now 
appreciate  that  strong  ties  to  the  mother  extend 
well  into  the  adult  life  of  her  offspring.  All  this 
is  to  say  that  I agree  with  Steward’s  point  of 
view,  though  I would  not  call  such  matrifocal 
groups  “families.”  Melvin  Neville,  who  has 
just  completed  field  work  on  rhesus  macaques 
in  India,  reports  that  one  of  the  rhesus  troops 
was  entirely  organized  around  adult  females. 
There  were  no  adult  males  in  the  troop  and 
males  who  tried  to  join  were  repulsed. 

Williams:  I want  to  go  back  to  the  state- 


Discussions,  Part  VII  343 

ments  by  the  first  two  gentlemen  and  to  suggest 
that  there  is  a type  of  problem  other  than  these 
raised  by  ecological  considerations.  If  you 
conceive  of  a situation  in  which  there  are 
homogeneously  distributed  families  who  are 
not  territorial  in  any  sense,  and  then  imagine 
them  coming  into  conflict  with  multifamily 
groups  who  do  defend  a territory — who  wins? 
I do  not  want  to  oppose  an  argument  to  data. 
Steward  says  that  he  has  data  that  show  people 
existing  only  in  families  throughout  an  area;  I 
suggest  that  it  is  a problem  to  understand  how 
this  could  continue,  assuming  that  they  could 
also  have  a higher  level  of  organization. 

Binford  : The  use  of  the  term  “family”  seems 
to  me  to  imply  a segment  of  social  system, 
rather  than  simply  the  form  of  a set  of  relation- 
ships between  individuals.  In  primate  social 
systems,  are  we  dealing  with  an  internally- 
segmented  system  based  on  units  that  are  not 
simply  parallel  sets  of  relationships  between 
individuals  classed  by  sex  and  age — relation- 
ships that  go  through  phases  related  to  the 
reproductive  cycle — or  are  we  seeing  an 
internally-segmented  system  that  goes  through 
annual  phases  of  aggregation  and  dispersion, 
where  these  are  regulated  by  the  ecological 
relationship  between  the  group  and  the  various 
subsistence  resources  that  the  group  depends 
on?  In  other  words,  I want  to  distinguish,  in 
Gearing’s  sense  (1958),  a series  of  structural 
poses  throughout  the  year  adjusted  to  cycles  in 
the  environment  from  what  in  primate  groups 
might  be  more  properly  viewed  in  terms  of  the 
reproductive  cycle  and  the  various  roles  that 
go  with  it.  If  we  view  the  family  in  the  former 
context,  then  speaking  of  the  family  with  res- 
pect to  primates  is  a questionable  kind  of 
analytical  concept. 

Washburn:  I would  like  to  underline  what 
Irv  DeVore  was  saying  about  the  female-plus- 
offspring  group  in  the  nonhuman  primates, 
because  I think  this  is  a major  discovery  of  the 
last  few  years.  At  least  in  rhesus  monkeys,  this 
can  last  until  the  young  are  fully  adult,  and 
Don  Sade  (Sade,  1965)  observed  one  case  in 
which  a mother  protected  her  offspring  by 
diverting  an  adult  male  from  attacking  the  off- 
spring, when  the  offspring  himself  was  fully 
mature.  So  this  is  definitely  a continuing  group. 
Furthermore,  in  marked  contrast  to  what  we 
used  to  think  in  anthropology,  rhesus  monkeys 


344  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

breed  only  during  six  months  of  the  year;  while 
the  mother-offspring  relationships  and  the 
whole  social  system  persist  throughout  the  en- 
tire year.  It  is  not  just  sex  that  is  holding  these 
groups  together ; they  are  in  some  sense  adap- 
tive groups  with  more  functions  and  more  com- 
plex functions  than  we  used  to  imagine. 

35c.  Future  Agenda 

Speakers:  Bulmer,  Condominas , Levi-Slrauss,  Pos- 
nansky,  Tax,  Watanabe,  Woodburn 

Levi-Strauss  : For  three  days  we  have  been 
discussing  the  cultural  category  of  hunter- 
gatherers,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  this  can  be 
taken  as  either  very  wide  or  very  narrow.  It  is 
very  narrow  if  we  insist  upon  limiting  the 
category  to  those  few  tribes  who  live  exclusively 
by  hunting  and  gathering.  But  in  the  course  of 
the  discussion  it  became  obvious  that  this  can- 
not be  done ; we  constantly  were  drawing  data 
from  populations  which  are  far  more  numerous 
and  are  hunter-gatherers  only  to  a certain  ex- 
tent. For  example,  Dr.  Lee  discussed  the  food 
supply  of  the  Bororo  under  the  headings  “hunt- 
ing,” “gathering,”  and  “fishing”;  while,  in 
fact,  the  Bororo  are  excellent  farmers  and  have 
been  so  for  a long  time — as  indicated  by  an 
extensive  mythology  about  cultivation,  which 
points  towards  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Andes. 

It  would  be  foolish,  in  my  opinion,  to  leave 
aside  the  direct  experience  we  ourselves  may 
have  had  in  our  own  societies  of  hunting  or 
gathering  behavior.  Although  my  example  may 
not  strike  home  to  Americans,  I suggest,  for 
example,  that  we  study  the  psychological  ex- 
perience of  people  in  France,  Russia,  and  else- 
where who  are  fond  of  gathering  mushrooms. 
In  many  parts  of  Europe  this  is  a full-fledged 
gathering  activity  available  to  our  study. 

More  attention  should  be  given  to  things 
which  are  neither  hunted  nor  gathered  in  a 
strict  sense  but  play  an  important  part  in  the 
lives  of  hunter-gatherers.  For  example,  the 
Guayaki  are  pure  hunter-gatherers  and  take 
great  care  during  hunting  expeditions  to  cut 
down  a certain  species  of  wild  palm  tree  from 
which  they  can  obtain  the  tasty  grubs  of  a 
certain  butterfly.  And,  in  fact,  a substantial 
portion  of  their  diet  is  made  up  of  these  grubs, 


which  they  both  gather  and  to  some  extent 
cultivate  in  stumps  of  the  palms. 

We  should  also  avoid  lumping  together  such 
tribes  as,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Guayaki  and 
Bushmen,  who  seem  always  to  have  plenty  to 
eat  and,  on  the  other,  the  Nambikwara,  who 
really  live  continually  on  the  verge  of 
starvation. 

Some  hunter-gatherers  practice  nomadism 
while  others  live  in  permanent  residences.  I 
might  mention  that  in  Southern  France  there 
was  recently  discovered  a Lower  Paleolithic 
site  at  which  there  was  a substantial  enough 
house  so  that  there  are  still  conspicuous  traces 
of  its  existence  approximately  200,000  years 
later.  Now,  nomadism  itself  may  in  some  cases 
consist  of  wandering  over  several  hundred 
square  miles  of  territory;  while  among  the 
Guayaki  it  consists  merely  in  a daily  inspection 
of  a small,  bounded  territory. 

From  these  and  other  types  of  variation — 
e.g.,  in  social  structure  and  in  marriage  rules — 
I conclude  that  it  might  be  useful  to  widen  the 
category  of  hunter-gatherer  culture.  Instead 
of  defining  it  in  terms  of  a number  of 
specific  groups  that  can  be  pointed  out  on  a 
map,  perhaps,  the  concept  should  be  defined 
in  terms  of  a certain  way  of  life  that  may  exist 
in  pure,  blended,  and  even  highly  diluted  (but 
still  interesting)  forms.  Then  we  see  that  the 
object  of  our  studies  is  not  so  much  individual 
tribes  as  it  is  a certain  type  of  behavior. 

I suggest  that  something  has  been  missing 
from  our  discussions  of  and,  indeed,  from  our 
research  on  hunting  and  gathering  peoples. 
That  is,  a careful  investigation  of  the  type  and 
amount  of  intellectual  knowledge  and  theory 
that  can  be  found  among  hunter-gatherers. 
We  should  try  to  learn  in  a systematic  way 
what  they  know  and  believe  about  each  species 
of  the  animal-vegetal  world.  Nothing  would  be 
moreinteresting  than  to  compare  the  knowledge, 
use,  and  beliefs  of  different  tribes  about  a bota- 
nical species  that  occurs  in  several  parts  of  the 
world.  The  same  could  be  done  with  mytho- 
logy. We  should  investigate  carefully  myths 
pertaining  to  each  type  of  activity.  For 
example,  mythology  about  honey-gathering  is 
practically  identical  in  South  America  and 
Indonesia  and  is  extremely  rich  in  both  regions, 
but  in  looking  into  Dr.  Turnbull’s  book  (1965) 

I was  struck  that  the  mythology  concerning 


honey-gathering  was  very  poor,  with  only  one 
myth  cited.  So  I express  the  hope  that  in  addi- 
tion to  the  standard  monographs — which  are, 
of  course,  of  the  greatest  importance — we  might 
envisage  putting  together  a kind  of  encyclo- 
pedia of  primitive  science  the  world  over, 
embodying  the  tremendous  body  of  knowledge 
that  otherwise  will  eventually  die  with  them. 

Bulmer:  I would  like  to  ask  ethnographers 
about  the  possibility  of  getting  data  on  the 
hunting  and  gathering  sectors  of  the  economies 
of  predominantly  horticultural  and  pastoral 
peoples.  Listening  to  accounts  of  hunter- 
gatherers,  I am  struck  by  the  way  in  which 
some  of  the  horticulturalists  in  New  Guinea 
seem  to  exploit  a much  more  comprehensive 
range  of  the  wild  fauna  and  flora  in  their 
environment  than  do  some  of  the  pure  hunter- 
gatherers.  There  are  technological  points  to  be 
learned  and  an  enormous  amount  of  botanical 
and  zoological  knowledge.  But  this  work  has  to 
be  done  quickly,  because  this  seems  to  be  one 
aspect  of  both  the  economy  and  the  traditional 
knowledge  that  is  very  rapidly  dwindling  since 
the  time  of  contact.  Agriculture  may  continue 
with  only  a few  changes,  but  once  the  children 
are  in  school  they  no  longer  learn  the  very 
complex  and  detailed  skills  required  for  the 
hunting  and  gathering  sectors  of  the  economy. 

Posnansky:  My  plea  is  a similar  one  for 
Africa.  Certainly  in  East  Africa  a great  deal  of 
hunting  and  gathering  is  carried  on  by  agricul- 
tural peoples.  We  have  now  looked  at  the 
primate  baseline  there,  but  I think  there  is 
still  a great  deal  to  be  learned  from  present-day 
peoples  in  these  same  areas.  Many  settled 
peoples  do  have  seasons  when  they  collect 
grubs,  flying  insects,  or  certain  kinds  of  roots. 
And,  according  to  recent  work  on  place-names 
done  in  Uganda,  it  appears  that  a lot  of  roots 
have  a complex  nomenclature,  which  seems  to 
indicate  that  many  of  them  were  collected  in 
the  past,  but  not  now.  This  approach  would 
tell  us  a good  deal  more  about  people  who  are 
still  practicing  hunting  and  gathering  in  non- 
retreat circumstances. 

Condominas  : I want  to  say  that  the  same 
situation  is  true  of  Southeast  Asia.  Last  summer 
I spent  time  with  one  of  my  students,  who  is  an 
ethnobotanist,  in  a Cambodian  village  of  rice 
cultivators.  Their  knowledge  of  the  forest,  es- 
pecially regarding  the  plants,  is  absolutely 


Discussions,  Part  VII  345 

fantastic.  And  it  is  of  a high  level,  perhaps  as 
high  as  that  of  the  forest  peoples  themselves. 

Woodburn:  I just  want  to  draw  attention  to 
a couple  of  subjects  which  have  not  been  much 
discussed. 

At  the  present  we  have  a very  inadequate 
understanding  of  the  way  in  which  authority 
is  exercised  in  the  domestic  groupings  and  the 
wider  residential  groupings  of  hunters  and 
gatherers.  The  subject  would  be  well  worth 
exploring  in  the  light  of  the  better  ethnographic 
material  now  becoming  available. 

I think  we  should  also  have  a fresh  and 
detailed  look  at  the  nature  of  the  various 
bonds  that  hold  people  together  in  the  resi- 
dential groupings  of  hunters  and  gatherers. 
What  transactions  occur  between  a man  and 
the  other  people  in  his  camp,  especially  his 
close  kin  and  affines?  To  what  extent  do 
cooperation  and  coordination  occur  in  subsis- 
tence activities  ? Do  people  combine  to  assert 
exclusive  rights  over  natural  resources?  Does 
inheritance  matter?  These  simple  questions  of 
ethnography  have  profound  implications  which 
would  bear  detailed  discussion. 

Watanabe:  Throughout  the  conference  we 
have  had  very  little  discussion  of  northern  food- 
gatherers,  including  hunter-gatherers.  If  we 
concentrate  primarily  on  problems  of  the 
evolution  of  Hominidae  or  hominization  only, 
these  northern  peoples  may  be  neglected.  But 
if  we  look  at  problems  concerning  the  evolution 
of  ourselves,  Homo  sapiens,  we  cannot  neglect 
them.  The  evolution  of  man  from  the  Upper 
Pleistocene  or  the  Upper  Paleolithic  onward 
has  proceeded  in  two  quite  different  habitats. 
When  man  entered  the  arctic-subarctic  regions 
his  evolution  began  to  follow  different  ways. 

Another  point  is  the  lack  of  discussion  of 
subsistence  technology  at  the  conference. 
Possible  links  between  prehistoric  archeology 
and  ethnography  may  be  found  only  through 
technology  and/or  the  material  aspects  of 
social  life.  Promotion  of  the  study  of  these 
subjects  from  a functional-ecological  point  of 
view  is  as  urgently  needed  as  the  promotion  of 
further  field  studies  of  surviving  food-gatherers. 

Tax:  I just  want  to  put  one  idea  in  the 
record,  and  that  is,  that  we  should  study  the 
reasons  for  the  persistence  of  these  peoples  all 
over  the  world  in  light  of  all  the  conditions 
militating  against  their  persistence.  I think 


346  Hunting  and  Human  Evolution 

that  the  case  of  the  North  American  Indians 
is  especially  significant.  They  seem  to  be  wait- 
ing for  us  to  go  away.  I am  certain  that  there 
is  something  for  us  peasant  agriculturalists  or, 


if  you  like,  industrialists  to  learn  from  the 
values  associated  with  the  tribal  life  and  with 
the  determination  of  these  peoples  to  preserve 
this  way  of  life  at  all  costs. 


Part  VIII 


The  Concept  of  Primitiveness 


The  Concept  of  Primitiveness 


CLAUDE  LEVI-STRAUSS 


Like  all  the  conferees,  I was  tremendously  im- 
pressed with  the  wealth,  diversity,  and  quality 
of  the  new  material  brought  before  us  by 
colleagues  recently  back  from  the  field.  This  is 
the  first  time  in  my  life  that  I have  attended  a 
conference  in  which  so  many  names  were  pre- 
viously unknown  to  me.  I could  understand 
why  as  soon  as  I came  into  the  room : the  age 
bracket  has  changed!  It  is  indeed  comforting 
to  know  that  anthropology  is  in  such  good 
hands,  and  to  discover  that  anthropology  is 
back  on  its  feet  again,  after  a period  when  it 
could  be  feared  that  anthropology  would  be- 
come nothing  more  than  an  attempt  to  work 
for  the  betterment  of  mankind  through  accul- 
turation studies.  It  is  not  that  this  latter  under- 
taking is  unworthy,  but  anthropology  has  also 
another  role,  that  is,  to  bear  testimony  to  future 
generations  of  the  ingeniousness,  diversity,  and 
imagination  of  our  species — qualities  of  which 
evidence  would  otherwise  soon  be  lost  forever. 

The  problems  we  have  discussed  are  urgent 
ones,  not  only  because  of  the  pressing  need  to 
study  vanishing  cultures,  but  also  because  the 
problems  occupy  a special  position  in  anthro- 
pological thinking,  making  them  frought  with 
ambiguity.  If  I try  to  grasp  the  general  move- 

The  Viking  Fund  Medal  and  Award  was  presented 
to  Prof.  L£vi-Strauss  on  April  8,  1966,  during  the  Con- 
ference on  Man  the  Hunter  at  the  University  of  Chicago 
Center  for  Continuing  Education.  This  paper  is  a 
slightly  edited  version  of  his  acceptance  speech. 


ment  of  our  discussion  so  far,  it  seems  to  me 
that  we  have  been  confronted  with  three  dif- 
ferent levels  of  ambiguity.  Our  main  task  is  to 
find  our  way  out  of  them. 

The  first  level  of  ambiguity  comes  from  the 
fact  that  one  of  the  purposes  of  this  conference 
is  to  bring  about  a kind  of  rehabilitation  of 
hunting  and  gathering  societies;  we  cannot 
consider  them  as  belonging  to  a semi-animal 
condition  of  mankind.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  I 
noticed  a strong  temptation  to  call  upon  recent 
studies  of  primates — monkeys  and  apes — or 
even  studies  of  lesser  mammals  such  as  rodents 
to  explain,  for  example,  the  existence  of  a 
territorial  instinct  in  Australian  aborigines. 
The  appearance  of  DeVore’s  magnificent 
studies  makes  the  consideration  of  such  prob- 
lems all  the  more  tantalizing.  However,  we 
should  not  forget  that  the  main  usefulness  of 
these  primate  studies  is  twofold : first,  they  per- 
mit us  to  make  hypotheses  about  early  forms 
of  incipient  human  cultures — that  is  to  say, 
what  took  place  about  one  or  two  million  years 
ago.  Second,  they  disclose  facts  which  are  so 
fundamental  that  if  they  hold  true  for  primates, 
they  also  hold  true  for  the  whole  of  mankind.  I 
do  not  think  they  can  have  a special  bearing 
on  a certain  type  of  society:  whether  they  refer 
to  the  remote  past  or  to  the  present,  their 
validity  should  be  universal.  So,  the  first  point 
is  that  hunter-gatherers,  different  as  they  may 
be  from  our  own  civilization,  belong  to  such  a 


349 


350  The  Concept  of  Primitiveness 

recent  past  that  there  is  a much  greater  dif- 
ference between  them  and  any  kind  of  animal 
society  than  between  them  and  more  complex 
human  societies. 

Certainly  we  should  not  try  to  use  these  re- 
cent hunter-gatherers  to  reconstruct  events  and 
conditions  in  the  prehistory  of  mankind.  I do 
not  claim  that  during  prehistoric  periods  small 
nomadic  bands  did  not  exist  that  were  com- 
parable in  size  and  perhaps  in  mode  of  life  or 
certain  activities  to  hunters  of  today.  However, 
prehistoric  groups  such  as  these  were  probably 
even  at  that  time  “leftovers”  or  devolved  des- 
cendants of  richer  contemporary  cultures.  For 
example,  it  has  been  suggested  during  this 
conference  that  the  best  ethnographic  com- 
parison for  the  Upper  Paleolithic  cultures  of 
the  Dordogne  are  the  cultures  of  the  Northwest 
Coast  Indians,  groups  excluded  from  compari- 
son here  on  the  grounds  that  they  were  too 
different  from  other  hunter-gatherers.  We 
should  also  recall  Lathrap’s  comment  earlier 
in  the  conference  that  in  South  America,  and 
no  doubt,  in  many  other  places,  hunter- 
gatherers  were  not  representative  of  an  earlier 
condition  of  mankind,  but  were  regressive 
rather  than  primitive.  I tried  to  make  this 
point  about  twenty  years  ago  for  the  Nambi- 
kwara1  and  I even  tried  to  demonstrate  it  by 
showing  that  there  were  diagnostic  symptoms 
in  a regressive  society,  consisting  on  the  one 
hand  of  internal  discrepancies  within  the  cul- 
ture, which  on  the  other  hand,  when  taken  one 
at  a time,  were  in  concord  with  what  was  hap- 
pening in  one  or  another  neighboring  society. 

The  second  level  of  ambiguity  has  to  do  with 
the  discrepancy  between  the  model  and  em- 
pirical reality.  It  seems  strange  to  me  to  have 
heard  at  this  conference  that  all  of  a sudden  it 
has  been  “discovered”  that  primitive  cultures 
are  similar  to  our  own  in  that  they  do  not 
follow  their  own  rules  closely.  Let  us  elaborate 
upon  this  by  taking  the  case  in  which  the  reality 
is  faithful  to  the  model  in  the  proportion  of,  let 
us  say,  20  per  cent  of  the  cases.  For  example, 
this  is  what  happens  in  societies  that  prescribe 
marriage  with  a cross-cousin,  but  where  there 
are  actually  only  about  15  per  cent  or  20  per 
cent  of  such  marriages  taking  place.  In  these 

1.  “The  Concept  of  Archaism  in  Anthropology,”  in 
Structural  Anthropology  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1963). 


cases,  we  cannot  say  that  the  model  is  not  con- 
forming to  reality,  because  we  know  that  for 
many  reasons — historical,  demographic,  and 
the  like — it  would  be  impossible  to  practice 
cross-cousin  marriage  at  a higher  rate.  And 
even  in  a case  such  as  this,  I maintain  that  a 
cross-cousin  marriage  rate  of  20  per  cent  is 
amply  sufficient  to  imprint  the  society  with  a 
given  structure,  to  give  a definite  shape  to 
what  we  may  call  the  genealogical  space,  to 
make  this  society  a member  of  a sort  of  species 
within  the  taxonomy  of  human  groups.  It 
should  not  be  dismissed  as  a case  in  which 
model  and  reality  do  not  correspond  closely  to 
one  another. 

The  other  point,  which  was  aptly  made  by 
Schneider,  is  that  a model  is  not  something 
different  from  reality;  rather,  a model  has  a 
reality  of  its  own.  A model  may  be  different 
from  what  takes  place  in  the  field,  but  it  is  real 
nonetheless,  and  it  should  be  studied  as  per- 
fectly objective.  I believe  that  the  reasons  for 
these  doubts  about  the  reality  of  models  have 
to  do  with  the  assumption  that  all  models  exist 
only  as  constructs  in  the  mind  of  the  anthro- 
pologist. However,  it  can  be  shown  that  quite 
frequently  models  exist  in  the  mind  of  the 
native,  and  possibly,  that  they  are  something 
more : perhaps  they  are  the  remote  products  of 
an  age-old  tradition  perpetuating  itself  in  the 
society  under  study. 

We  have  been  trying  to  compare  the  data  of 
social  anthropology  and  those  of  prehistory. 
But  it  is  worthwhile  asking  oneself  about  the 
ideas  of  hunter-gatherers  themselves  have  about 
prehistory.  In  my  studies  of  mythology,  I came 
across  some  very  remarkable  conceptions  that 
are  latent  in  the  mind  of  certain  South  Ameri- 
can tribes.  It  can  be  shown  that  in  the  mytho- 
logy we  have,  so  to  speak,  an  embedded  theory 
of  kinship.  Let  me  quickly  give  you  an  example. 
In  South  America,  the  myths  dealing  with  the 
origin  of  culture  (that  is,  the  invention  of  fire, 
the  cooking  of  meat,  and  the  first  implements) 
call  upon  protagonists  who  usually  have  very 
precise  relationships  to  one  another.  They  are 
affines,  and  moreover,  affines  of  a very  special 
type — either  the  sister’s  brother,  the  wife’s 
brother,  or  the  sister’s  husband.  These  are  also 
the  kinds  of  in-laws  we  feel  compelled  to  re- 
present in  our  diagrams,  for  they  are  needed 
to  express  the  male  and  the  female  part  of  a 


lineage;  they  are  the  men  who  exchange  wo- 
men between  themselves.  The  South  American 
myths  dealing  with  the  origin  of  cultivation, 
however,  bring  affines  of  a different  type  on 
the  scene — that  is,  the  wife’s  sister  and  the 
husband’s  brother — these  being  types  of  people 
we  disregard  by  virtue  of  the  principle  of  the 
equivalence  of  siblings,  well  known  in  the 
theory  of  kinship  since  Radcliffe-Brown.  Thus, 
in  these  myths  we  have  two  different  models  of 
kinship  relationships : the  first,  which  could  be 
called  a “paleolithic”  model  (without  implying 
any  historical  connotations),  shows  the  reduc- 
tion to  basic  and  indispensible  elements  such 
that  matrimonial  exchanges  can  take  place.  In 
the  second,  or  “neolithic,”  model  (since  it  is 
found  with  references  to  the  origins  of  cultiva- 
tion), the  composition  of  the  family  becomes 
random,  and  there  are  too  many  people  to 
fulfill  neatly  the  requirements  of  exchange; 
supernumerary  affines  appear  who  are  useless 
in  the  social  structure,  their  social  function 
being  usually  limited  to  that  of  potential  se- 
ducer of  their  sibling’s  spouse.  Here  we  can  see 
that  the  distinction  between  what  may  be 
called  parallel  and  cross  affines  is  not  just  in 
the  anthropologist’s  mind  but  rooted  very 
deeply  in  the  principles  of  myths. 

Hiatt  has  suggested  two  possible  explanations 
for  the  discrepancy  between  model  and  reality 
in  Australian  society;  however,  there  is  also  a 
third  worth  considering — that  at  one  time,  all 
this  completed  theory  was  clearly  conceived 
and  invented  by  native  sociologists  or  philo- 
sophers. Thus,  what  we  are  doing  is  not  build- 
ing a theory  with  which  to  interpret  the  facts, 
but  rather  trying  to  get  back  to  the  older  native 
theory  at  the  origin  of  the  facts  we  are  trying 
to  explain.  After  all,  we  know  that  mankind  is 
about  one  or  two  million  years  old,  but  while 
we  are  ready  to  grant  man  this  great  antiquity, 
we  are  not  ready  to  grant  him  a continuous 
thinking  capacity  during  this  enormous  length 
of  time.  I see  no  reason  why  mankind  should 
have  waited  until  recent  times  to  produce  minds 
of  the  caliber  of  a Plato  or  an  Einstein.  Already 
over  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  years  ago, 
there  were  probably  men  of  a similar  capacity, 
who  were  of  course  not  applying  their  intelli- 
gence to  the  solution  of  the  same  problems  as 
these  more  recent  thinkers;  instead,  they  were 
probably  more  interested  in  kinship ! 


L6vi-Strauss  The  Concept  of  Primitiveness  351 

The  third  level  of  ambiguity  crept  into  our 
discussions  unexpectedly,  thanks  to  our  Aus- 
tralian colleagues,  who  began  to  question  old 
results  about  things  which  unfortunately  do 
not  exist  any  more.  The  great  question  that  is 
thus  raised  refers  to  the  nature  of  truth  in 
anthropological  research.  When  we  are  told 
that  fifty-year-old  facts  (which  cannot  be  re- 
studied) are  not  exactly  like  those  described  by 
the  present-day  observer,  we  are  led  to  wonder 
whether  it  is  the  anthropological  objects  which 
have  changed  or  whether  it  is  anthropology 
itself  which  has  changed  and  therefore  cannot 
satisfy  itself  with  the  same  kinds  of  answers  any 
more.  What  is  really  “truth”  in  anthropology? 
What  is  really  “proved”  ? Is  anthropological 
truth  factual  evidence  of  the  same  kind  as  that 
sought  by  the  exact  sciences,  or  does  it  consist 
in  a special  kind  of  relationship  between  the 
observed  and  the  observer?  As  with  the  study 
of  those  objects  that  are  so  distant  (either  be- 
cause they  are  far  away  or  because  they  exist 
on  a scale  so  small  that  we  will  never  appre- 
hend them  as  they  actually  are),  our  percep- 
tion of  anthropological  entities  will  be  limited 
to  the  different  manners  in  which  we  perceive 
them.  And  in  that  case,  the  only  pretension  to 
truth  that  we  may  have  will  be  limited  to  a set 
of  complementary  points  of  view  which  leave 
room  for  fundamental  uncertainties,  incapable 
of  final  resolution.  Thus  it  could  not  be  said  that 
one  type  of  explanation  should  or  will  super- 
sede another  type.  Instead,  a fact  which  must 
forever  remain  unknown  will  be  more  and  more 
closely  surrounded  by  different  perspectives, 
but  these  will  be  perspectives  on  a thing  which 
in  itself  will  remain  unattainable.  This  has  to 
do  partially  with  the  subject  matter:  the  ob- 
server can  never  coincide  with  the  observed 
and,  despite  the  fact  that  in  the  human  sciences 
what  is  observed  and  who  observes  belong  to 
the  same  category  of  things,  they  can  never 
become  the  same  individual  without  losing  the 
scientific  outlook  and  perspective.  It  seems  to 
me  that  from  an  epistemological  viewpoint, 
what  we  have  learned  about  the  evolution  of 
the  conception  of  the  Australian  band  or  horde 
raises  an  extremely  important  point,  not  only 
for  Australian  anthropological  studies  but  for 
the  fundamental  problems  before  us  all. 

If  I may  be  permitted  to  draw  a conclusion 
from  these  remarks,  we  should  probably  be 


352  The  Concept  of  Primitiveness 

more  cautious  when  tempted  to  dismiss  the 
work  of  our  great  predecessors  in  the  light  of 
new  outlooks  or  recent  observations.  What  they 
have  seen  and  recorded  is  gone  and  we  cannot 
be  sure  that  we  are  actually  observing  the  same 
kind  of  evidence.  In  anthropology,  as  else- 


where, progress  will  never  result  from  destroy- 
ing what  has  been  previously  achieved  but 
rather  from  incorporating  the  past  of  our 
science  into  its  present  and  future,  enriching 
the  one  with  the  other  and  turning  the  whole 
process  into  a lasting  reality. 


References 


Aberle,  David  F.,  Urie  Bronfenbrenner,  Eckard  H.  Hess,  Daniel  R.  Miller,  David  M.  Schneider, 
and  James  N.  Spuhler. 

1963.  The  incest  taboo  and  the  mating  patterns  of  animals.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  65:  253-65. 
Ackerknecht,  Erwin  H. 

1948.  Medicine  and  disease  among  Eskimos.  In  The  Eskimo,  CIBA  Symposia,  10(1):  916-21. 

Adams,  Robert  Mcc. 

1966.  The  evolution  of  urban  society:  early  Mesopotamia  and  prehispanic  Mexico.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing 
Company. 

de  Almeida,  Antonio. 

1965.  Bushmen  and  other  non- Bantu  peoples  of  Angola.  Publication  of  the  Institute  for  the  Study  of  Man  in 
Africa,  1.  Johannesburg:  Witwatersrand  University  Press. 

Anastasio,  Angelo. 

1955.  Intergroup  relations  in  the  southern  plateau.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Chicago. 
Anderson,  A.  J.,  and  E.  J.  Underwood. 

'959-  Trace  element  deserts.  Scientific  American,  200  (1):  97-106. 

Ardrey,  Robert. 

1961.  African  genesis.  London:  Atheneum. 

1966a.  The  basic  drive — for  territory.  Life,  61(9):  40-59. 

1966b.  Man,  the  territorial  animal.  Life,  61(10):  50-59. 

Ascher,  Robert. 

1962.  Ethnography  for  archaeology:  a case  from  the  Seri  Indians.  Ethnology,  1 (3) : 360-69. 

Aschmann,  Homer. 

■959-  The  central  desert  of  Baja  California:  demography  and  ecology.  Ibero-Americana  (Berkeley  and  Los 
Angeles),  42. 

Ashby,  W.  R. 

i960.  Design  for  a brain.  (2d  ed.,  rev.)  New  York:  John  Wiley. 

Ashley-Montagu,  M.  F. 

1 937.  Coming  into  being  among  the  Australian  Aborigines.  London:  George  Routledge. 

1 957 . The  reproductive  development  of  the  female:  with  especial  reference  to  the  period  of  adolescent  sterility.  New 
York:  Julian  Press. 


353 


354  References 

Australia.  National  Mapping  Council. 

1952.  Sydney.  Australian  Geographical  Series — 1:1,000,000.  S. I. -56/1.  Canberra:  Department  of 
National  Development. 

1954.  Melbourne.  Australian  Geographical  Series — 1:1,000,000.  S.J.-55/1.  Canberra:  Department  of 
National  Development. 

1957.  Melville  Island.  Australian  Geographical  Series — 1 : 1,000,000.  S.C. -52/1. Canberra:  Department  of 
National  Development. 

Australia.  Regional  Development  Division. 

1953.  Atlas  of  Australian  resources.  Canberra:  Department  of  National  Development. 

Australia.  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research  Organization. 

i960.  The  Australian  environment.  (3d  ed.,  rev.)  Melbourne. 

Back,  George. 

1 836.  Narrative  of  the  Arctic  land  expedition  to  the  mouth  of  the  Great  Fish  River,  and  along  the  shores  of  the  Arctic 
Ocean,  in  the  years  1833,  1834,  and  1833.  London:  John  Murray. 

Baer,  G.,  and  C.  A.  Schitz. 

1965.  On  the  social  organization  of  the  Ona  (Selk’nam).  Journal  de  la  Sociltides  Amhicanistes  (Paris)  (n.s.), 
54:  23-29. 

Baerends,  G.  P. 

1958.  The  contribution  of  ethology  to  the  study  of  the  causation  of  behaviour.  Acta  Physiologica  et 
Pharmacologica  Neerlandica,  7:  466-99. 

Bailey,  John. 

1863.  An  account  of  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Veddahs  of  Ceylon;  their  habits,  customs,  and  superstititions 
Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London  (n.s.),  2 : 278-320. 

Baldus,  Herbert. 

1931.  Indianerstudien  im  nordostlichen  Chaco.  Forschungen  zur  Volker psychologic  und  Soziologie  (Leipzig), 

1 1 : 1-230. 

Balikci,  Asen. 

■960.  Quelques  cas  de  suicide  parmi  les  esquimaux  Netsilik.  Actes  du  VIe  Congres  International  des  Sciences 
Anthropologiques  et  Ethnologiques  (Paris),  2:  511-16. 

1963.  Le  regime  matrimonial  des  esquimaux  Netsilik.  L'Homme,  3(3):  89-101. 

1964.  Development  of  basic  socio-economic  units  in  two  Eskimo  communities.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum 
of  Canada,  anthropological  series,  no.  202. 

MS.  Infanticide  in  the  Netsilik  area.  Paper  presented  at  Seminar  on  Ecological  Systems  and  Cultural 
Evolution,  Columbia  University.  Unpublished. 

Balke,  Bruno,  and  Clyde  Snow. 

1965.  Anthropological  and  physiological  observations  on  Tarahumara  endurance  runners.  American 
Journal  of  Physical  Anthropology  (n.s.),  23:  293-301. 

Barnes,  J . A. 

1963.  Social  organization:  limits  of  contemporary  studies.  In  Helen  Sheils  (Ed.),  Australian  aboriginal 
studies.  Melbourne:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Barnes,  Victor  S.  (Ed.) . 

1964.  The  modern  encyclopedia  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  Sydney,  Melbourne:  Horwitz-Grahame. 
Barnett,  Homer  G. 

1937.  Culture  element  distribution,  VII:  Oregon  coast.  Anthropological  Records  (Berkeley),  1(3):  155-204. 

1938.  The  nature  of  the  potlatch.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  40:  349-58. 

Barns,  T.  A. 

1923.  Across  the  great  craterland  to  the  Congo.  London:  Benn. 

Barry,  Herbert,  Irving  Child,  and  Margaret  K.  Bacon. 

1959.  The  relation  of  child  training  to  subsistence  economy.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  61 : 51-63. 
Bartholomew,  George  A.,  Jr.,  and  Joseph  B.  Birdsell. 

1953.  Ecology  and  the  protohominids.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  55:  481-98. 

Basedow,  Herbert. 


References  355 


1925.  The  Australian  aboriginal.  Adelaide:  F.  W.  Preece. 

1932.  Diseases  of  the  Australian  aborigines.  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene  (London),  35:  177-85, 
193-98,  209-213,  229-33,  247-50,  273-78. 

Baumhoff,  Martin  A. 

1958.  Ecological  determinants  of  population.  University  of  California  Archaeological  Survey  Reports  (Berkeley), 
48:  32-65. 

1963.  Ecological  determinants  of  aboriginal  California  populations.  University  of  California  Publications  in 
American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology  (Berkeley),  49(2):  155-236. 

Beals,  Ralph  L. 

1933.  Ethnology  of  the  Nisenan.  University  of  California  Publications  in  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology 
(Berkeley),  31(6):  335-414. 

Beckett,  Jeremy  R. 

1958.  Marginal  men:  a study  of  two  half-caste  aborigines.  Oceania,  29:  91-108. 

Bell,  Francis  L.  S. 

1946-48.  The  place  of  food  in  the  social  life  of  the  Tanga.  Oceania.  17:  139-72,  310-26;  18:  36-59, 
233-47;  19:  51-74- 
Bernatzik,  Hugo  Adolf. 

1958.  The  spirits  of  the  yellow  leaves.  Trans,  by  E.  W.  Dickes.  London:  Robert  Hale.  (First  published 
1938  as  Die  Geister  der  gelben  Blatter.  Munich:  F.  Bruckman.) 

Berndt,  Ronald  M. 

1959.  The  concept  of  “the  tribe”  in  the  western  desert  of  Australia.  Oceania,  30:  81-107. 

Berndt,  Ronald  M.,  and  Catherine  H.  Berndt. 

1942.  A preliminary  report  of  field  work  in  the  Ooldea region,  western  South  Australia. Oceania, 1 3 :143_®9- 

1964.  The  world  of  the  first  Australians.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

1965.  Aboriginal  man  in  Australia:  essays  in  honor  of  Emeritus  Professor  A.  P.  Elkin.  Sydney,  London, 
Melbourne:  Angus  and  Robertson. 

Bertoni,  M.  S. 

1941.  Los  Guayakis.  Revista  de  la  Sociedad  Cientifica  de  Paraguay,  5:  1-62. 

Bicchieri,  Marco. 

1965.  A study  of  the  ecology  of  food-gathering  peoples : a cross-cultural  analysis  of  the  relationships  of  environment, 
technology,  and  bio-cultural  variability.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Minnesota. 
Billington,  B.  P. 

1960.  The  health  and  nutritional  status  of  the  aborigines.  In  C.  P.  Mountford  (Ed.),  Records  of  the 
American- Australian  scientific  expedition  to  Arnhem  Land:  2.  Anthropology  and  nutrition.  Melbourne:  Melbourne 
University  Press. 

Binford,  Lewis  R. 

1962.  Archaeology  as  anthropology.  American  Antiquity,  28(2):  217-25. 

1963.  Red  ochre  caches  from  the  Michigan  area:  a possible  cases  of  cultural  drift.  Southwestern  Journal  of 
Anthropology,  19(1):  89-108. 

1964.  A consideration  of  archaeological  research  design.  American  Antiquity,  29(4) : 425-41. 

1967.  Smudge  pits  and  hide  smoking:  the  use  of  analogy  in  archaeological  reasoning.  American  Antiquity, 
32(1):  1-12. 

Binford,  Lewis  R.,  and  Sally  R.  Binford. 

1966a.  The  predatory  revolution:  a consideration  of  the  evidence  for  a new  subsistence  level.  American 
Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(2),  pt.  1:  508-512. 

1966b.  A preliminary  analysis  of  functional  variability  in  the  Mousterian  of  Levallois  facies.  In  J.  D. 
Clark  and  F.  C.  Howell  (Eds.),  Recent  studies  in  paleoanthropology.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(2),  pt.  2. 
Binford,  Lewis  R.,  and  G.  I.  Quimby. 

1963.  Indian  sites  and  chipped  stone  materials  in  the  northern  Lake  Michigan  area.  Fieldiana 
Anthropology,  36(12):  277-307. 

Bingham,  H.  C. 

1932.  Gorillas  in  a native  habitat.  Publications  of  the  Carnegie  Institute  of  Washington,  no.  426. 


356  References 
Bird,  Junius. 

1946.  The  Alacaluf.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians,  vol.  1 : The  marginal  tribes. 
Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin,  143  (1):  55-79. 

Birdsell,  J.  B. 

1950.  Some  implications  of  the  genetical  concept  of  race  in  terms  of  spatial  analysis.  Cold  Spring  Harbor 
Symposia  in  Quantitative  Biology,  15:  259-314. 

!953.  Some  environmental  and  cultural  factors  influencing  the  structuring  of  Australian  aboriginal 
populations.  American  Naturalist,  87(834):  171-207. 

1957.  Some  population  problems  involving  Pleistocene  Man.  In  Population  studies:  animal  ecology  and 
demography.  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Symposia  in  Quantitative  Biology,  22 : 47-69. 

1958.  On  population  structure  in  generalized  hunting  and  collecting  populations.  Evolution,  12(2): 
189-205. 

MS  1.  A basic  demographic  unit  and  a scale  for  measuring  some  social  phenomena.  University  of  Texas,  Austin, 
Texas. 

MS2.  The  role  of  systematic  infanticide  in  human  evolution.  University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles. 

MS3-  Population  dynamics  as  revealed  in  models  of  patrilineal  band  structured  society.  University  of  California  at 
Los  Angeles. 

Birket-Smith,  Kaj. 

1929.  The  Caribou  Eskimos:  material  and  social  life  and  their  cultural  position.  Report  of  the  fifth  Thule 
expedition,  1921-24,  5.  Trans,  by  W.  E.  Calvert.  Copenhagen:  Gyldendalske  boghandel. 

1930.  Contributions  to  Chipewyan  ethnology.  Report  of  the  fifth  Thule  expedition,  1921-24,  6(3).  Copen- 
hagen: Gyldendalske  boghandel. 

1953.  The  Chugach  Eskimo.  Ethnografisk  Raekke,  6.  Copenhagen:  Nationalmuseets  Skrifter. 

Bishop,  W.  W.,  and  J.  D.  Clark  (Eds.). 

1967.  Background  of  African  evolution.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Black,  Robert  H. 

1959.  Haptoglobins  and  haemoglobins  in  Australian  aborigines.  Medical  Journal  of  Australia  (Sydney), 

1959(0 : I75-76- 

Bleek,  Dorothea  F. 

1928.  The  Naron:  a Bushman  tribe  of  the  central  Kalahari.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

1931a.  The  Hadzapi  or  Watindega  of  Tanganyika  territory.  Africa,  4:  273-85. 

1931b.  Traces  of  former  Bushman  occupation  in  Tanganyika  Territory.  South  African  Journal  of  Science,  28. 
1956.  A Bushman  dictionary.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  American  Oriental  Series,  no.  41. 

Boas,  Franz. 

1888.  The  Central  Eskimo.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Annual  Report  no.  6 (for  1884-85) : 399-699. 
1909.  The  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition  (5,  pt.  2):  The  Kwakiutl  of  Vancouver  Island.  Memoirs  of  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  8(2). 

1916.  Tsimshian  mythology.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Annual  Report  no.  31  (for  1909-10) : 29-1037. 
1921.  Ethnology  of  the  Kwakiutl,  based  on  data  collected  by  George  Hunt.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology, 
Annual  Report  no.  35  (for  1913-14),  pts.  1 and  2. 

1935.  Kwakiutl  culture  as  reflected  in  mythology.  American  Folklore  Society  Memoir,  28. 

1938.  Invention.  In  F.  Boas  etal.  (Eds.),  General  anthropology.  Boston,  London:  D.  C.  Heath. 

Bodes,  J.  J. 

1963.  Second  expedition  to  the  Mrabri  of  north  Thailand.  Journal  of  the  Siam  Society,  51 : 133-60. 
Boggiani,  Guido. 

1894.  I Ciamacoco.  Rome:  Presso  la  Societa  Romana  per  l’Antropologia. 

Bogoras,  W. 

1904-09.  The  Chukchee.  American  Museum  of  Natural  History  Memoir,  no.  1 1. 

Bordes,  Francois  H. 

1953.  Essai  de  classification  des  industries  “Mousteriennes.”  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Prihistorique  Franfaise, 
50(7-8) : 457-66. 

1961.  Typologie  du  paleolithique  ancien  et  moyen.  Publications  de  l’Universit^  de  Bordeaux,  M&noires  de 


References  357 


l’Institute  Pr^historique,  no.  1. 

Boserup,  Ester. 

1965.  The  conditions  of  agricultural  growth:  the  economics  of  agrarian  change  under  population  pressure.  Chicago: 
Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

Botswana,  Government  of. 

1966.  Republic  of  Botswana  fact  sheet.  Gabarones,  Botswana. 

Boulding,  Kenneth  E. 

1955.  The  Malthusian  model  as  a general  system.  Social  and  Economic  Studies  (Kingston,  Jamaica),  4: 
1 95-205- 

Bourliere,  Francois. 

1963.  Observations  on  the  ecology  of  some  large  African  mammals.  In  F.  C.  Howell  and  F.  Bourliere 
(Eds.),  African  ecology  and  human  evolution.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

1964.  The  natural  history  of  mammals.  (3d  ed.,  rev.)  New  York:  Alfred  Knopf.  (First  published  1951  as 
Vie  et  moeurs  des  mammiferes.  Paris:  Payot.) 

Boys,  Robert  Douglass. 

■959 ■ First  years  at  Port  Phillip  1834-1842,  preceded  by  a summary  of  historical  events  from  iy68.  (2d  ed.) 
Melbourne:  Robertson  and  Mullens. 

Braidwood,  Robert  J. 

*959-  Archaeology  and  the  evolutionary  theory.  In  Evolution  and  anthropology : a centennial  appraisal. 
Washington,  D.C.:  Anthropological  Society  of  Washington. 

Braidwood,  Robert  J.,  and  Charles  A.  Reed. 

1957.  The  achievement  and  early  consequences  of  food-production:  a consideration  of  the  archaeological 
and  natural-historical  evidence.  In  Population  studies:  animal  ecology  and  demography.  Cold  Spring  Harbor 
Symposia  in  Quantitative  Biology,  22:  19-31. 

Brandt,  J . H. 

1961.  The  Negrito  of  peninsular  Thailand.  Journal  of  the  Siam  Society,  49:  123-60. 

1965.  The  Southeast  Asian  Negrito:  further  notes  on  the  Negrito  of  south  Thailand.  Journal  of  the  Siam 
Society,  53:  27-43. 

Bridges,  E.  Lucas. 

1949.  The  uttermost  part  of  the  earth.  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton. 

Bronte-Stewart,  B.,  O.  E.  Budtz-Olsen,  Joan  M.  Hickley,  and  J.  F.  Brock. 

i960.  The  health  and  nutritional  status  of  the  Kung  Bushmen  of  South-West  Africa.  South  African  Journal 
of  Laboratory  Clinical  Medicine,  6:  187-216. 

Brues,  Alice. 

1959.  The  spearman  and  the  archer,  an  essay  on  selection  in  body  build.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.), 
61:  457-69. 

Butzer,  Karl  W. 

1964.  Environment  and  archeology:  an  introduction  to  Pleistocene  geography.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing 
Company. 

Calhoun,  John  B. 

1962.  Population  density  and  social  pathology.  Scientific  American,  206(2):  139-48. 

Callen,  E.  O.,  and  T.  W.  M.  Cameron. 

1960.  A prehistoric  diet  revealed  in  coprolites.  New  Scientist,  8:  35-40. 

Campbell,  J.  M. 

1965.  Settlements  and  settlement  patterns:  some  lessons  from  the  north.  Paper  presented  at  American  Anthropo- 
logical Association  Annual  Meeting,  Denver. 

Campbell,  T.  D. 

1934.  Notes  on  the  aborigines  of  the  southeast  of  South  Australia,  pt.  1.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of 
South  Australia,  58:  22-32. 

1939.  Notes  on  the  aborigines  of  the  southeast  of  South  Australia,  pt.  2.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of 
South  Australia,  63:  27-38. 


358  References 
Carneiro,  Robert  L. 

1960.  Slash-and-burn  agriculture:  a closer  look  at  its  implications  for  settlement  patterns.  Selected  Papers 
of  the  Fifth  International  Congress  of  Anthropological  and  Ethnological  Sciences  (Philadelphia). 

1961.  Slash-and-burn  cultivation  among  the  Kuikuru  and  its  implications  for  cultural  development  in 
the  Amazon  basin.  In  J.  Wilbert  (Ed.),  The  evolution  of  horticultural  systems  in  native  South  America,  causes  and 
consequences : a symposium.  Anthropoldgica  (Caracas),  Supplementary  Publication  no.  2. 

1964.  Shifting  cultivation  among  the  Amahuaca  of  eastern  Peru.  Volkerkundliche  Abhandlungen  (Hanover), 
1 : 9-18. 

Carpenter,  Clarence  R. 

1941.  A field  study  in  Siam  of  the  behavior  and  social  relations  of  the  Gibbon  ( Hylobales  lar).  Baltimore : Johns 
Hopkins  Press. 

1942.  Characteristics  of  social  behavior  in  non-human  primates.  Transactions  of  the  New  York  Academy  of 
Sciences,  series  2,  4:  248-58. 

!955.  Tentative  generalizations  on  the  grouping  behavior  of  non-human  primates.  In  J.  A.  Gaven  (Ed.), 
The  non-human  primates  and  human  evolution.  Detroit:  Wayne  State  University  Press. 

1964.  Naturalistic  behavior  of  nonhuman  primates.  University  Park:  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press. 
Carr-Saunders,  A.  M. 

1 922.  The  population  problem : a study  in  human  evolution.  Oxford : Oxford  University  Press. 

Carulli,  E. 

1922.  Folk  literature  of  the  Galla  of  southern  Abyssinia.  Harvard  African  Studies  3:  Varia  Africana,  3. 
Caseley-Smith,  J.  R. 

1959.  The  haemotology  of  the  central  Australian  aborigine,  1 1.  White  and  differential  counts;  eosinophil 
counts  and  Casoni-tests.  Australian  Journal  of  Experimental  Biology  and  Medical  Science,  37:  481-88. 
Chamisso,  Adelbertus  de. 

1824.  Cetaceorum  maris  Kamtschatici  imagines,  ab  Aleutis  e ligno  fictas,  adumbravit  recensuitque. 
V erhandlungen  der  Kaiserlichen  Leopoldnisch-Carolinischen  Akademie  der  Naturforscher  (Breslau  and  Bonn),  4(1) : 
249-62  (Nova  Acta,  12,  pt.  1). 

Chang,  Kwang-Chih. 

1962.  A typology  of  settlement  and  community  patterns  in  some  circumpolar  societies.  Arctic  Anthropology 
.(1):  28-4.. 

1967.  Major  aspects  of  the  interrelationship  of  archaeology  and  ethnology.  Current  Anthropology,  8(3) : 227-34. 
Chewings,  Charles. 

1936.  Back  in  the  stone  age : the  natives  of  central  Australia.  Sydney:  Angus  and  Robertson. 

Childe,  V.  Gordon. 

1943.  Archaeology  in  the  U.S.S.R.;  the  forest  zone.  Alan,  43:  4-9. 

Chrustov,  G.  F. 

1959.  K voprosu  ob  otnoshjenijach  sobstvjennosti  v pjervob’itnom  obshchestvje  (On  the  question  of 
property  relations  in  earliest  society)  Sovjetskaja  Etnografija,  1959(6) : 16-36. 

Clark,  J.  Desmond. 

1959.  Further  excavations  at  Broken  Hill,  Northern  Rhodesia.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  89(2):  201-232. 

1965.  Culture  and  ecology  in  prehistoric  Africa.  In  D.  Brokensha  (Ed.),  Ecology  and  economic  development  in 
tropical  Africa.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Institute  of  International  Studies. 

1 966.  Acheulean  occupation  sites  in  the  Middle  East  and  Africa : a study  in  cultural  variability.  In  J.  D. 
Clark  and  F.  C.  Howell  (Eds.),  Recent  studies  in  paleoanthropology.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(2),  pt.  2. 

Clark,  J.  Graham  D. 

1954.  Excavations  at  Star  Carr:  an  early  Mesolithic  site  at  Seamer  near  Scarborough,  Yorkshire.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge  University  Press. 

1960.  Comment  on  J.  Desmond  Clark’s  “Human  ecology  during  Pleistocene  and  later  times  in  Africa 
south  of  the  Sahara,”  Current  Anthropology,  1(4):  321. 

Clark,  J.  Graham  D.,  and  Stuart  Piggott. 

1965.  Prehistoric  societies.  New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf. 


References  359 


Cleland,  J.  Burton. 

1928.  Disease  amongst  the  Australian  aborigines.  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene,  31  : 53-59,  65-70, 
I4J-45.  >57-6°.  1 73-77.  196-98.  232-35,  262-66,  281-82,  290-94,  307-313,  326-30. 

Cleland,  J.  Burton,  and  T.  Harvey  Johnston. 

1933.  The  ecology  of  the  aborigines  of  Central  Australia:  botanical  notes.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of 
South  Australia,  57  : 1 1 3-24. 

1939.  Aboriginal  names  and  uses  of  plants  at  the  Granites,  Central  Australia.  Transactions  of  the  Royal 
Society  of  South  Australia,  63(1) : 22-26. 

Cleland,  J.  Burton,  and  Norman  B.  Tindale. 

1959  The  native  names  and  uses  of  plants  at  Haast  Bluff,  Central  Australia.  Transactions  of  the  Royal 
Society  of  South  Australia,  82:  123-40. 

Clemens,  W.  A.,  and  G.  V.  Wilby. 

1946.  Fishes  of  the  Pacific  coast  of  Canada.  Fisheries  Research  Board  of  Canada  (Ottawa)  Bulletin  no.  68. 
Codere,  Helen. 

1951  .Fighting  with  property:  a study  of  Kwakiutl  potlatching  and  warfare.  Monographs  of  the  American 
Ethnological  Society,  no.  18.  Seattle:  University  of  Washington  Press. 

1959.  The  understanding  of  the  Kwakiutl.  In  W.  Goldschmidt  (Ed.),  The  anthropology  of  Franz  Boas. 
American  Anthropological  Association  Memoir,  no.  89. 

Cohen,  R.,  and  J.  W.  Van  Stone. 

1964.  Dependency  and  self-sufficiency  in  Chipewyan  stories.  In  Contributions  to  Anthropology  1961-62,  pt.  2, 
Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  194:  29-55. 

Colbacchini,  Antonio,  and  C.  Albisetti. 

1942.  Os  Bororos  Orientalis,  Orarimogodogue  de  Planalto  Oriental  de  Mato  Grosso.  Sao  Paulo:  Companhia 
Editora  Nacional. 

Cole,  Sonia  M. 

1963.  The  prehistory  of  East  Africa,  (rev.)  New  York:  Macmillan.  (First  published  1954.  Hamondsworth : 
Penguin). 

Collins,  David. 

1804.  An  account  of  the  English  colony  in  New  South  Wales.  (2d  ed.)  London:  T.  Cadell  and  W.  Davies. 
Collins,  H.  B. 

1940.  Outline  of  Eskimo  prehistory.  Smithsonian  Miscellaneous  Collections,  100:  533-92. 

Conklin,  Harold  C. 

1957.  Hanunoo  Agriculture : a report  on  an  integral  system  of  shifting  cultivation  in  the  Philippines,  vol.  2.  Rome: 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations. 

Cook,  Sherburne  F. 

1955.  The  epidemic  of  1 830-1833  in  California  and  Oregon.  University  of  California  Publications  in  American 
Archaeology  and  Ethnology  (Berkeley),  43:  303-326. 

Cook,  Sherburne  F.,  and  Robert  F.  Heizer. 

1965.  The  quantitative  approach  to  the  relation  between  population  and  settlement  size.  Report  of  the 
University  of  California  Archaeology  Survey,  64.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 

Cook,  Sherburne  F.,  and  A.  E.  Treganza. 

1950.  The  quantitative  investigation  of  Indian  mounds.  University  of  California  Publications  in  American 
Archaeology  and  Ethnology  (Berkeley),  40(5) : 223-61. 

Coon,  Carleton  S. 

1948.  Reader  in  general  anthropology.  New  York:  Henry  Holt. 

Cooper,  B. 

1949.  The  Kindiga.  Tanganyika  Notes  and  Records,  27:  8-15. 

Cooper,  J.  M. 

1946.  The  culture  of  the  Northeastern  Indian  hunters;  a reconstructive  interpretation.  In  F.  Johnson 
(Ed.),  Man  in  Northeastern  North  America.  Papers  of  the  Robert  Peabody  Foundation  for  Archaeology 
(Andover)  3:  272-305. 


360  References 
Cowan,  Ian  McTaggart. 

1945.  The  ecological  relationships  of  the  food  of  the  Columbian  black-tailed  deer,  Odocoileus  hemionus 
columbianus  (Richardson),  in  the  coast  forest  region  of  southern  Vancouver  Island,  British  Columbia. 
Ecological  Monographs,  15(2):  109-139. 

Cowan,  Ian  McTaggart,  and  C.  J.  Guigueta. 

1956.  The  mammals  of  British  Columbia.  British  Columbia  Provincial  Museum  Handbook,  no.  1 1. 
Crocker,  Christopher. 

1967.  The  social  organization  of  the  eastern  Bororo.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  Harvard  University. 
Cronin,  Constance. 

1962.  An  analysis  of  pottery  design  elements,  indicating  possible  relationships  between  three  decorated 
types.  In  P.  S.  Martin  et  al.  (Eds.),  Chapters  in  the  prehistory  of  eastern  Arizona,  Fieldiana  Anthropology,  53: 
105-1 14. 

Crotty,  J.  M.,  and  R.  C.  Webb. 

1960.  Mortality  in  Northern  Territory  aborigines.  Medical  Journal  of  Australia,  1960(2):  489-92. 

Crow,  James  F. 

1961.  Mechanisms  and  trends  in  human  evolution.  Daedalus,  90(3) : 416-31. 

Cruxent,  Jose  M.,  and  Irving  Rouse. 

1959.  An  archaeological  chronology  of  Venezuela.  Pan  American  Union  , Social  Science  Monographs  no.  6, 
vols.  1 and  2. 

Cuisinier,  Jeanne. 

1948.  Les  Muong : Geographic  humaine  et  sociologie.  Paris:  Institut  d’Ethnologic. 

Curr,  Edward  M. 

1886-87.  The  Australian  race  (4  vols.).  Melbourne:  John  Ferres. 

Curtis,  E.  S. 

1928.  The  North  American  Indian,  vol.  18:  the  Chipewyan,  the  Cree,  and  Sarsi.  Seattle : Norwood. 

Damas,  David. 

1963.  Igluligmiut  kinship  and  local  groupings:  a structural  approach.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of 
Canada,  no.  196. 

1969.  Characteristics  of  Central  Eskimo  band  structure.  In  D.  Damas  (Ed.),  Band  societies:  proceedings  of 
the  conference  on  band  organization,  Ottawa,  30  August  to  2 September  1965,  National  Museum  of  Canada 
Bulletin  No.  228:  116-138. 

In  press  b.  Social  anthropology  in  the  Eskimo  area.  Proceedings  of  the  36th  International  Congress  of  Ameri- 
canists, 1964. 

Dansereau,  Pierre  M. 

1957.  Biogeography : an  ecological  perspective.  New  York:  Ronald  Press. 

Davenport,  William. 

1959.  Nonunilinear  descent  and  descent  groups.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  61:  557-72. 

Davidson,  Daniel  S. 

1926.  The  basis  of  social  organization  in  Australia.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  28:  529-48. 

1928a.  The  chronological  aspects  of  certain  Australian  social  institutions  as  inferred  from  geographical  distribution. 
Philadelphia:  University  of  Pennsylvania  Press. 

1928b.  A preliminary  survey  of  the  family  hunting  territory  in  Australia.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.), 
30:  614-31. 

1 933-  Australian  netting  and  basketry  techniques.  Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  42:  257-99. 

1934.  Australian  spear-traits  and  their  derivations.  Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  43:  41-72,  142-62. 

1 935-  The  chronology  of  Australian  watercraft.  Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  44:  1 — 1 6,  69-84,  137-52, 
193-207. 

1936.  Australian  throwing-sticks,  throwing-clubs,  and  boomerangs.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  38: 
76-100. 

1 937-  Transport  and  receptacles  in  aboriginal  Australia.  Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  46:  175-205. 

1 938a.  A preliminary  register  of  Australian  tribes  and  hordes.  Philadelphia  : American  Philosophical  Society. 
1938b.  Stone  axes  from  western  Australia.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  40:  38-48. 


References  36 1 


1947.  Fire-making  in  Australia.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  49:  426-37. 

1949a.  Disposal  of  the  dead  in  western  Australia.  Proceedings  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society , 93:  71-97. 
1949b.  Mourning-caps  of  the  Australian  aborigines.  Proceedings  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  93: 
57-70. 

1952.  Notes  on  the  pictographs  and  petroglyphs  of  western  Australia  and  a discussion  of  their  affinities 
with  appearances  elsewhere  on  the  continent.  Proceedings  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  96:  76-1 1 7. 
'953-  The  possible  source  and  antiquity  of  the  slate  Churingas  of  western  Australia.  Proceedings  of  the 
American  Philosophical  Society,  97:  194-213. 

Davidson,  Daniel  S.,  and  Frederick  D.  McCarthy. 

1957.  The  distribution  and  chronology  of  some  important  types  of  stone  implements  in  western  Australia. 
Anthropos,  52 1:  390-458. 

Dawson,  James. 

1881.  Australian  aborigines,  the  languages  and  customs  of  several  tribes  of  aborigines  in  the  western  district  of  Victoria, 
Australia.  Melbourne:  G.  Robertson. 

Deetz,  James  J.  F. 

i960.  An  archaeological  approach  to  kinship  change  in  eighteenth-century  Ankara  culture.  Unpublished  doctoral 
dissertation,  Harvard  University. 

1965.  The  dynamics  of  stylistic  change  in  Arikara  ceramics.  Illinois  Studies  in  Anthropology,  no.  4.  Urbana: 
University  of  Illinois  Press. 

Deevey,  Edward  S. 

1956.  The  human  crop.  Scientific  American,  194(4):  105-112. 
i960.  The  human  population.  Scientific  American,  203(3):  194-204. 

DeVore,  Irven. 

1963.  A comparison  of  the  ecology  and  behavior  of  monkeys  and  apes.  In  S.  L.  Washburn  (Ed.),  Classifi- 
cation and  human  evolution.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

1965.  Priihate  behavior  (Ed.).  New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart,  and  Winston. 

DeVore,  Irven,  and  K.  R.  L.  Hall. 

1965.  Baboon  ecology.  In  I.  DeVore  (Ed.),  Primate  behavior.  New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart,  and  Winston. 
DeVore,  Irven,  and  Sherwood  L.  Washburn. 

1963.  Baboon  ecology  and  human  evolution.  In  F.  C.  Howell  and  F.  Bourliere  (Eds.),  African  ecology  and 
human  evolution.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

Dobzhansky,  Theodosius. 

1950.  Evolution  in  the  tropics.  American  Scientist,  38:  209-221. 

Dole,  Gertrude  E. 

1960.  The  classification  ofYankee  nomenclature  in  the  light  of  evolution  in  kinship.  In  Gertrude  E.  Dole 
and  Robert  L.  Carneiro  (Eds.),  Essays  in  the  science  of  culture  in  honor  of  Leslie  A.  White.  New  York: 
Thomas  Y.  Crowell. 

Doob,  Leonard  W. 

1965.  Psychology.  In  R.  A.  Lystad  (Ed.),  The  African  world.  New  York:  Praeger. 

Dornan,  Samuel  S. 

1925.  Pygmies  and  Bushmen  of  the  Kalahari.  London:  Seeley. 

Driver,  Harold  E. 

'939-  Culture  element  distributions,  10:  Northwest  California.  Anthropological  Records  (Berkeley),  1(6): 
297-433- 

1961.  Indians  of  North  America.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Driver,  Harold  E.,  and  Wilhelmine  Driver. 

1963.  Ethnography  and  acculturation  of  the  Chichimeca-Jonaz  of  northeast  Mexico.  Bloomington:  Indiana 
University  Press. 

Drucker,  Philip. 

'937-  The  Tolowa  and  their  southwestern  Oregon  kin.  University  of  California  Publications  in  American 
Archaeology  and  Ethnology  (Berkeley),  36(4):  221-300. 

1939.  Rank,  wealth  and  kinship  in  Northwest  Coast  society.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  41 : 55-65. 


362  Referencts 

1950.  Culture  element  distribution,  26:  Northwest  Coast.  Anthropological  Records  (Berkeley),  9(3):  157- 
294- 

1951.  The  northern  and  central  Nootkan  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  no.  144. 

1955.  Indians  of  the  Northwest  Coast.  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Anthropological  Handbook, 
no.  10.  (Reprinted  1963:  American  Museum  Science  Books.  Garden  City:  Natural  History  Press.) 

1965.  Cultures  of  the  North  Pacific  Coast.  San  Francisco:  Chandler. 

Dubois,  Cora  A. 

1936.  The  wealth  concept  as  an  integrative  factor  in  Tolowa-Tututni  culture.  In  R.  H.  Lowie  (Ed.), 
Essays  in  anthropology  presented  to  A.  L.  Kroeber.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 

Dubos,  Rene. 

1965.  Man  adapting.  Yale  University  Silliman  memorial  lectures,  39.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 
Duff,  Wilson. 

1952.  The  Upper  Stalo  Indians  of  the  Fraser  Valley,  British  Columbia.  In  Anthropology  in  British  Columbia. 
British  Columbia  Provincial  Museum,  Memoir  no.  1 . 

1964.  The  Indian  history  of  British  Columbia,  vol.  1:  The  impact  of  the  white  man.  In  Anthropology  in  British 
Columbia.  British  Columbia  Provincial  Museum,  Memoir  no.  5. 

Duguid,  Charles. 

1963.  No  dying  race.  Adelaide:  Rigby  Ltd. 

Dunn,  F.  L. 

Ms  1 . Ecology,  acculturation,  and  parasitism  in  the  Orang  Asli  of  Malaya.  Paper  presented  at  meetings  of  South- 
western Anthropological  Association,  UCLA,  Los  Angeles,  1965.  Unpublished. 

1966.  Ecological  simplification,  parasitism,  and  primate  evolution.  Abstract.  American  Journal  of  Physical 
Anthropology  25:205. 

Dunn,  F.  L.,  and  J.  M.  Bolton. 

1963.  The  MIF  direct  smear  (DS)  method  in  the  study  of  intestinal  parasitism  in  Malayan  aborigines. 
Singapore  Medical  Journal,  4 : 1 75-76. 

Dunning,  R.  W. 

i 959.  Social  and  economic  change  among  the  Northern  Ojibwa.  Toronto : University  of  Toronto  Press. 

i960.  Differentiation  of  status  in  subsistence  level  societies.  Proceedings  and  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society 

of  Canada,  54,  2:  25-32. 

Edwards,  E.  L. 

1952.  Ethnohistory  of  the  Mackenzie  Valley  from  Providence  to  Aklavik.  Unpublished  master’s  thesis,  New  York 
University. 

Egg  an,  Fred. 

1954.  Social  anthropology  and  the  method  of  controlled  comparison.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  56: 

743-63- 

1955.  Social  anthropology:  methods  and  results.  In  F.  Eggan  (Ed.),  Social  anthropology  of  North  American 
tribes.  (2d  ed.)  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Eiseley,  Loren  C. 

1947.  Land  tenure  in  the  Northeast:  a note  on  the  history  of  the  concept.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.), 
49:  680-81. 

Ekblaw,  W.  Elmer. 

1948.  Significance  of  movement  among  the  Polar  Eskimo.  Bulletin  of  the  Massachusetts  Archaeological  Society, 
10:  1-4. 

Elkin,  A.  P. 

1931.  The  social  organization  of  South  Australian  tribes.  Oceania,  2:  44-73. 

1932.  Social  organization  in  the  Kimberley  Division,  northwestern  Australia.  Oceania,  2:  296-333. 

!933.  Studies  in  Australian  totemism.  Oceania  Monographs,  no.  2. 

1938.  The  Australian  aborigines : how  to  understand  them.  (1st.  ed.)  Sydney:  Angus  and  Robertson. 

1938-40.  Kinship  in  South  Australia.  Oceania,  8:  419-52;  9:  41-78;  10:  196-234,  295-349,  369-88. 

1945.  Aboriginal  men  of  high  degree.  Sydney:  Australasian  Publishing  Co. 

1 950.  The  complexity  of  social  organization  in  Arnhem  Land.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology,  6 : 1-20. 


References  363 

1953.  Murngin  kinship  re-examined  and  remarks  on  some  generalizations.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.), 
55:  412-19. 

1954.  The  Australian  aborigines:  how  to  understand  them.  (3d  ed.)  Sydney:  Angus  and  Robertson. 

1962.  Introduction.  In  M.  J.  Meggitt,  Desert  people:  a study  of  the  Walbiri  aborigines  of  Central  Australia. 
Sydney:  Angus  and  Robertson. 

1964.  The  Australian  aborigines : how  to  understand  them.  (4th  ed.)  Sydney:  Angus  and  Robertson. 

Ellefson,  J.  O. 

1966.  A natural  history  of  gibbons  in  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley. 

Elliott,  Henry  W. 

1886.  Our  Arctic  province  : Alaska  and  the  Seal  islands.  New  York:  Scribner’s. 

Elmendorf,  W.  W. 

i960.  The  structure  of  Twana  culture.  Washington  State  University  Research  Studies,  Monograph  Supple- 
ment no.  2.  Pullman:  Washington  State  University. 

Evans,  Ivor  H.  N. 

1 937-  7^  Negritos  of  Malaya.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

Eylmann,  E. 

1902.  Das  Feuermachen  der  Eingeborenen  der  Colonie  Siid-Australien.  feitschrift fur  Ethnologie  (Berlin), 
■34:  89-94. 

Eyre,  Edward  John. 

1845.  Journals  of  expeditions  of  discovery  into  Central  Australia  and  overland  from  Adelaide  to  King  George's  Sound, 
in  the  years  1840-1.  London:  T.  and  W.  Boone. 

Falkenberg,  Johannes. 

1962.  Kin  and  totem.  London:  George  Allen  and  Unwin. 

Farabee,  William  C. 

1918.  The  Central  Arawakis.  University  Museum  Anthropological  Publications,  no.  9.  Philadelphia 
University  of  Pennsylvania. 

1924.  The  Central  Caribs.  University  Museum  Anthropological  Publications,  no.  10.  Philadelphia: 
University  of  Pennsylvania. 

Fidler,  Peter. 

1934.  Journal  of  a journey  with  the  Chipewyans  or  Northern  Indians,  to  the  Slave  Lake,  & to  the  east 
& west  of  the  Slave  River,  in  1791  & 2.  In  J.  B.  Tyrrell  (Ed.),  Journals  of  Samuel  Hearne  and  Philip 
Turner  between  theyears  1774  and  1792,  Publication  of  the  Champlain  Society,  21 : 493-555.  Toronto:  Champlain 
Society. 

Firth,  Raymond  W. 

1954.  Social  organization  and  social  change.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  84:  1-20. 

1966.  Twins,  birds  and  vegetables:  problems  of  identification  in  primitive  religious  thought.  Man  (n.s.), 
1:  1-17. 

Fison,  Lorimer. 

1870a.  Comparative  table  on  the  Tongan  and  Fijian  system  of  relationships  made  by  Rev.  Lorimer 
Fison,  Rawa,  Fiji,  December,  1869.  In  L.  H.  Morgan,  Systems  of  consanguinity  and  affinity  of  the  human  family. 
Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge,  17:  573-77. 

1870b.  Remarks  of  Mr.  Fison  on  the  Fijian  system.  In  L.  H.  Morgan,  Systems  of  consanguinity  and  affinity  of 
the  human  family.  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge,  17:  580-83. 

1870c.  Remarks  of  Mr.  Fison  on  the  Tongan  system.  In  L.  H.  Morgan,  Systems  of  consanguinity  and  affinity  of 
the  human  family.  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge,  17:  578-80. 

Fison,  Lorimer,  and  A.  W.  Howitt. 

1880.  Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai.  Melbourne:  George  Robertson. 

Flanagan,  Roderick  J. 

1888.  The  aborigines  of  Australia.  Sydney:  Edward  F.  Flanagan  and  George  Robertson. 


364  References 


Flannery,  Regina. 

1946.  The  culture  of  the  northeastern  Indian  hunters:  a descriptive  survey.  In  F.  Johnson  (Ed.),  Man  in 
northeastern  North  America.  Papers  of  the  Robert  Peabody  Foundation  for  Archaeology  (Andover),  3: 
263-71. 

Flatz,  Gebhard. 

1963.  The  Mrabri.  Journal  of  the  Siam  Society , 51 : 161-78. 

1964.  Die  Geister  der  gelben  Blatter:  medizinische,  anthrometrische  und  genetische  Untersuchung  der 
Mrabri  in  Nordthailand.  Zeitschriftf  ur  Ethnologie  (Braunschewig),  89:  23-34. 

Fock,  Nels. 

1963.  Waiwai:  religion  and  society  of  an  Amazonian  tribe.  Nationalmuseets  Shifter  (Copenhagen),  8. 
Forde,  C.  Daryll. 

1934.  Habitat,  economy,  and  society:  a geographical  introduction  to  ethnology.  London:  Methuen. 

1954.  Foraging,  hunting  and  fishing.  In  Charles  Singer,  E.  J.  Holmyard,  and  A.  R.  Hall  (Eds.),  A history 
of  technology  (vol.  1 ) . Oxford : Clarendon  Press. 

Fortes,  Meyer. 

1949.  Time  and  social  structure:  an  Ashanti  casestudy.  In  M.  Fortes  (Ed.),  Social  structure:  essays  presented 
to  A.  R.  Radcliffe-Brown.  London:  Clarendon  Press. 

1950.  Kinship  and  marriage  among  the  Ashanti.  In  A.  R.  RadclifTe-Brown  and  C.  Daryll  Forde  (Eds.), 
African  systems  of  kinship  and  marriage.  London:  Oxford  University  Press. 

1 953.  The  structure  of  unilineal  descent  groups.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  55:  17-41. 

Fox,  J.  R. 

1965.  Demography  and  social  anthropology.  Man,  65:  86-87. 

Frake,  Charles  O. 

1962.  Cultural  ecology  and  ethnography.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  64(1):  53-59. 

Franklin,  John. 

1823.  Narrative  of  a journey  to  the  shore  of  the  Polar  Sea  in  the  years  1819-20-21-22.  London:  John  Murray. 
1828.  Narrative  of  a second  expedition  to  the  shores  of  the  Polar  Sea  in  the  years  1825,  1826,  and  1827.  London: 
John  Murray. 

Freeman,  Derek. 

1964.  Human  aggression  in  anthropological  perspective.  In  J.  D.  Carthy  and  F.  J,  Ebling  (Eds.),  The 
natural  history  of  aggression.  New  York:  Academic  Press. 

Freeman,  Leslie  G. 

1966.  The  nature  of  the  Mousterian  facies  in  Cantabrian  Spain.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(2),  pt.  2 : 
230-37. 

Freeman,  Leslie  G.,  and  James  A.  Brovvn. 

1964.  Statistical  analysis  of  Carter  Ranch  pottery.  In  P.  S.  Martin  et  al.  (Eds.),  Chapters  in  the  prehistory  of 
eastern  Arizona  II,  Fieldiana  Anthropology,  55:  126-54. 

Freeman,  Leslie  G.,  and  Karl  W.  Butzer. 

In  press.  The  Acheulean  Station  of  Torralba,  Spain:  a progress  report.  Quaternaria,  8. 

Fried,  Jacob. 

1 955.  A survey  of  the  aboriginal  populations  of  Quebec  and  Labrador.  Eastern  Canadian  Anthropological  Series, 
no.  1. 

Fry,  H.  Kenneth. 

1934.  Kinship  and  descent  among  the  Australian  aborigines.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  South 
Australia,  58:  14-21. 

Furer-Haimendorf,  C.  von. 

1943.  The  Chenchus.  London:  Macmillan. 

Furness,  W.  H. 

1902.  The  home-life  of  Borneo  Head-Hunters.  Philadelphia:  J.  B.  Lippincott. 

Gabus,  Jean. 

I95I-52.  Contribution  a l’etude  des  Nemadi,  chasseurs  archaiques  du  Djouf.  Bulletin  der  Schweizerischen 
Gesellschaft  fur  Anthropologie  und  Ethnologie,  28:  49-83. 


References  365 


Gajdusek,  D.  Carleton. 

1963.  Ethnopediatrics  as  a study  of  cybernetics  of  human  development.  American  Journal  of  Diseases  of 
Children,  105:  554-59. 

Gallus,  Alexander. 

1966.  Comments  on  L.  Pradel’s  “Transition  from  Mousterian  to  Perigordian:  skeletal  and  industrial.” 
Current  Anthropology,  7(1):  39. 

Garfield,  Viola  E. 

1945.  A research  problem  in  northwest  Indian  economics.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  47:  626-30. 

1951.  The  Tsimshian  and  their  neighbors.  The  Tsimshian:  their  arts  and  music.  American  Ethnological  Society 
Publication  no.  18.  New  York:  Augustin. 

Gartlan,  J.  S. 

In  press.  Social  dominance  in  primate  societies. 

Gearing,  Fred. 

1958.  The  structural  poses  of  eighteenth-century  Cherokee  villages.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  60: 

1 148-58. 

1962.  Priests  and  warriors:  social  structures  for  Cherokee  politics  in  the  18th  century.  American  Anthro- 
pologist (n.s.),  64(5),  pt.  2. 

Giddings,  James  L.,  Jr. 

1952.  Observations  on  the  “Eskimo  type”  of  kinship  and  social  structure.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the 
University  of  Alaska,  1(1):  5-10. 

1960.  The  archaeology  of  Bering  Strait.  Current  Anthropology,  1(2):  121-38. 

Gifford,  Edward  W. 

1926.  Miwok  lineages  and  the  political  unit  in  aboriginal  California.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  28: 
389-401. 

Gilmore,  Raymond  M. 

1950.  Fauna  and  ethnozoology  of  South  America.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American 
Indians,  vol.  6:  Physical  anthropology,  linguistics,  and  cultural  geography  of  South  American  Indians.  Bureau  of 
American  Ethnology  Bulletin,  143(6):  345-464. 

Ginsberg,  Benson  E.,  and  William  S.  Laughlin. 

1966.  The  multiple  bases  of  human  adaptability  and  achievement:  a species  point  of  view.  Eugenics 
Quarterly,  13(3):  240-57. 

Gjessing,  Gutorm. 

1944.  Circum-Polar  stone  age.  Acta  Arctica,  2. 

Glass,  Bentley. 

1965.  The  ethical  basis  of  science.  Science,  150(3701):  1254-61. 

Goddard,  P.  E. 

1961.  The  Beaver  Indians.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  10(4) : 201-293. 
Goggin,  John  M.,  and  W.  C.  Sturtevant. 

1964.  The  Calusa:  a stratified,  nonagricultural  society  (with  notes  on  sibling  marriage).  In  W.  H. 
Goodenough  (Ed.),  Explorations  in  cultural  anthropology : essays  in  honor  of  George  Peter  Murdock.  New  York: 
McGraw-Hill. 

Goldman,  Irving. 

1948.  Tribes  of  the  Uaupes-Caueta  region.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians, 
vol.  3:  The  tropical  forest  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  143(3):  763-98. 

1963.  The  Cubeo:  Indians  of  the  northwest  Amazon.  Illinois  Studies  in  Anthropology,  no.  2.  Urbana:  Uni- 
versity of  Illinois  Press. 

Goldschmidt,  Walter  R. 

1948.  Social  organization  in  native  California  and  the  origin  of  clans.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  50: 
444-56. 

1959.  Man's  way : a preface  to  the  understanding  of  human  society.  New  York:  Henry  Holt. 

1966.  Comparative  functionalism:  an  essay  in  anthropological  theory.  Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles:  University  of 
California  Press. 


366  References 

Goodale,  Jane. 

1957.  Alonga  bush:  a Tiwi  hunt.  University  Museum  Bulletin,  21:  3-35.  Philadelphia:  University  of 
Pennsylvania. 

1962.  Marriage  contracts  among  the  Tiwi.  Ethnology,  1(4):  452-66. 

Good  all,  Jane. 

1963.  Feeding  behavior  of  wild  chimpanzees:  a preliminary  report.  In  The  primates:  proceedings  of  the 
symposium  held  on  isth-i4th  April  ig6s.  Zoological  Society  of  London,  Symposia,  10. 

1965.  Chimpanzees  on  the  Gombe  Stream  reserve.  In  I.  DeVore  (Ed.),  Primate  behavior.  New  York: 
Holt,  Rinehart  and  Winston. 

Goodall,  Jane,  and  Hugo  von  Lawick. 

1965.  My  life  with  wild  chimpanzees.  (16mm  film).  Washington,  D.C. : National  Geographic  Society. 
Goode,  J.  Paul. 

1957.  Goode's  world  atlas.  ( 10th  ed.)  Ed.  by  Edward  B.  Espenshade.  Chicago : Rand  McNally. 
Goodenough,  Ward  H. 

1962.  Kindred  and  hamlet  in  Lakalai,  New  Britain.  Ethnology,  1(1):  5-12. 

Gould,  Richard  A. 

1966.  The  wealth  quest  among  the  Tolowa  Indians  of  northwestern  California.  Proceedings  of  the  American 
Philosophical  Society,  110(1):  67-89. 

Greenberg,  J.  H. 

1950.  Studies  in  African  linguistic  classification:  6,  the  click  languages.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology, 
6(3):  223-37- 
Grey,  George. 

1841.  Journals  of  two  expeditions  of  discovery  in  north-western  and  western  Australia,  during  the  years  1837,  '38,  and 
'33.  London:  T.  and  W.  Boone. 

Gubser,  N.  J. 

1965.  The  Nunamiut  Eskimos : hunters  of  caribou.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

Guemple,  D.  L. 

1965.  Saunik:  name  sharing  as  a factor  governing  Eskimo  kinship  terms.  Ethnology,  4(3) : 323-35. 
Gulliver,  Pamela,  and  Philip  H.  Gulliver. 

1953.  The  Central  Nilo-Hamites.  London:  International  African  Institute. 

Gunther,  E. 

1927.  Klallam  ethnography.  University  of  Washington  Publications  in  Anthropology  (Seattle),  1 : 171-314. 
Gusinde,  Martin  (Ed.). 

1931-39.  Die  Feuerland  Indianer  (3  vols.).  St.  Gabriel-Modling  bei  Wein:  Verlag  der  intemationalen 
Zeitschrift  Anthropos. 

1961.  The  Yamans:  the  life  and  thought  of  the  water  nomads  of  Cape  Horn.  Trans,  by  Frieda  Schultze.  New 
Haven,  Conn. : Human  Relations  Area  Files. 

Hagen,  Bernhard. 

1908.  Die  Orang  Kubu  auf  Sumatra.  Veroffentlichungen  des  Stadtischen  Volker-Museum,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  2. 
Hainline,  Jane. 

1965.  Culture  and  biological  adaptation.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  67(5):  1174-97. 

Hajnal,  J. 

1963.  Concepts  of  random  mating  and  the  frequency  of  consanguineous  marriages.  Proceedings  of  the  Royal 
Society  (London),  Series  B,  159:  125-77. 

Haldane,  J.  B.  S. 

1956.  The  argument  from  animals  to  men:  an  examination  of  its  validity  for  anthropology.  Journal  of  the 
Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  86:  1 — 14. 

1957.  Natural  selection  in  man.  Acta  Genetica  et  Statistica  Medica  (Basel),  6:  321-32. 

Hall,  Edward  T. 

1966.  The  hidden  dimension.  Garden  City,  N.Y. : Doubleday. 

Hall,  K.  R.  L. 

1963.  Variations  in  the  ecology  of  the  Chacma  baboon,  Papio  ursinus.  In  The  primates:  proceedings  of  the 


References  367 


symposium  held  on  isth- 14th  April  ig6s.  Zoological  Society  of  London,  Symposia,  10. 

Hall,  K.  R.  L.,  and  Irven  DeVore. 

1965.  Baboon  social  behavior.  In  I.  DeVore  (Ed.),  Primate  behavior.  New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart,  and 
Winston. 

Hallowell,  A.  Irving. 

1 937.  Cross-cousin  marriage  in  the  Lake  Winnipeg  area.  Publications  of  the  Philadelphia  Anthropological 
Society,  1 : 95-1 10. 

1946.  Some  psychological  characteristics  of  the  northeastern  Indians.  In  F.  Johnson  (Ed.),  Man  in  north- 
eastern North  America.  Papers  of  the  Robert  Peabody  Foundation  for  Archaeology  (Andover),  3:  195-225. 
1949.  The  size  of  Algonkian  hunting  territories:  a function  of  ecological  adjustment.  American  Anthro- 
pologist (n.s.),  51 : 35-45. 

1960.  Ojibwa  ontology,  behavior,  and  world  view.  In  Stanley  Diamond  (Ed.),  Culture  in  history:  essays  in 
honor  of  Paul  Rodin.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press. 

Hamburg,  David  A. 

1961.  The  relevance  of  recent  evolutionary  changes  to  human  stress  biology.  In  S.  L.  Washburn  (Ed.), 
Social  life  of  early  man.  Chicago : Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

1963.  Emotions  in  the  perspective  of  human  evolution.  In  P.  H.  Knapp  (Ed.),  Expression  of  the  emotions  in 
man.  New  York:  International  Universities  Press. 

Hart,  Charles  W.  M. 

1930a.  Personal  names  amongst  the  Tiwi.  Oceania,  1:  280-90. 

1930b.  The  Tiwi  of  Melville  and  Bathurst  Islands.  Oceania,  1:  167-80. 

1943.  A reconsideration  of  the  Natchez  social  structure.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  45:  374-86. 

Hart,  Charles  W.  M.,  and  Arnold  R.  Pilling. 

1960.  The  Tiwi  of  northern  Australia.  New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart  and  Winston., 

Hawkes,  Christopher. 

1954.  Archeological  theory  and  method:  some  suggestions  from  the  Old  World.  American  Anthropologist 
(n.s.),  56:  155-68. 

Hearne,  Samuel. 

1911.  Ajoumey  from  Prince  of  Wales  Fortin  Hudson's  Bay  to  the  Northern  Ocean  in  the  years  iy6g,  1770,  1771, and 
177s.  Publications  of  the  Champlain  Society  (Toronto),  no.  6,  J.  B.  Tyrrell  (Ed.).  (First  published  1795; 
London:  A.  Strahan  and  T.  Cadell.) 

Heinz,  H.  J. 

1961.  Factors  governing  the  survival  of  Bushmen  worm  parasites  in  the  Kalahari.  South  African  Journal  of 
Science,  57:  207-213. 

Heizer,  Robert  F. 

1960.  The  Aleut  sea  otter  hunt  in  the  late  nineteenth  century.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  University  of 
Alaska,  8(2):  131-35. 

Helm,  June. 

1961.  The  Lynx  Point  people : the  dynamics  of  a northern  Athapaskan  band.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of 
Canada,  no.  1 76. 

1965a.  Bilaterality  in  the  socio-territorial  organization  of  the  Arctic  drainage  D£n£.  Ethnology,  4(4): 
361-85. 

1965b.  Patterns  of  allocation  among  the  Arctic  drainage  D£n£.  In  June  Helm  (Ed.),  Essays  in  economic 
anthropology.  Annual  Proceedings  of  the  American  Ethnological  Society.  Seattle:  University  of  Washington 
Press. 

1969.  A method  of  statistical  analysis  of  primary  relative  bonds  in  community  composition.  In  D.  Damas 
(Ed.),  Band  societies:  proceedings  of  the  conference  on  band  organization,  Ottawa,  30  August  to  2 September 
1965,  National  Museum  of  Canada  Bulletin  No.  228. 

In  press  . The  structure  of  bands  among  the  Arctic  drainage  D£n6.  Papers  of  the  VII  International  Congress 
of  Ethnological  and  Anthropological  Sciences,  Moscow,  1 964. 

Helm,  June,  and  David  Damas. 

1963.  The  contact-traditional  all-native  community  of  the  Canadian  north:  the  upper  Mackenzie 


368  References 

“bush”  Athapaskans  and  the  Igluligmiut.  Anthropologica  (n.s.),  5:  9-21. 

Helm,  June,  G.  A.  DeVos,  and  Teresa  Carterette. 

1963.  Variations  in  personality  and  ego  identification  in  a Slave  Indian  kin-community.  Bulletin  of  the 
National  Museum  of  Canada,  180(2):  94-138. 

Helm,  June,  and  Nancy  O.  Lurie. 

1961.  The  subsistence  economy  of  the  Dogrib  Indians  of  Lac  la  Martre  in  the  Mackenzie  District  of  the  Northwest 
Territories.  Ottawa : Northern  Coordination  and  Research  Center,  Department  of  Northern  Affairs  and 
National  Resources,  Canada. 

1966.  The  Dogrib  hand  game.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  no.  205. 

Helm,  June,  and  Vital  Thomas. 

In  press.  Tales  from  the  Dogribs.  The  Beaver  (Winnipeg). 

Henry,  Jules. 

1941.  Jungle  people : a Kaingang  tribe  of  the  Highlands  of  Brazil.  New  York:  J.  J.  Augustin.  (Reprinted  New 
York:  Vintage,  1964.) 

Hernandez,  Theodore. 

1941.  Social  organization  of  the  Drysdale  River  tribes,  northwest  Australia.  Oceania,  11:21 1-32. 

Hiatt,  L.  R. 

1962.  Local  organization  among  the  Australian  aborigines.  Oceania,  32:  267-86. 

1965.  Kinship  and  conflict:  a study  of  an  aboriginal  community  in  northern  Arnhem  Land.  Canberra:  Australian 
National  University. 

1966.  The  lost  horde.  Oceania,  37:  81-92. 

Hickerson,  Harold. 

1960.  The  feast  of  the  dead  among  the  seventeenth  century  Algonkins  of  the  upper  Great  Lakes.  American 
Anthropologist  (n.s.),  62:  81-107. 

1962.  The  southwestern  Chippewa:  an  ethnohistorical  study.  American  Anthropological  Association  Memoir, 
no.  92. 

Hilbert,  Peter  Paul. 

1962a.  Preliminary  results  of  archaeological  research  of  the  Japura  River,  middle  Amazon.  Akten  des  34 
Internationalen  Amerikanistenkongresses,  Wien  ig6o:  465-70. 

1962b.  New  stratigraphic  evidence  of  culture  change  on  the  middle  Amazon  (Solimoes).  Akten  des  34 
Internationalen  Amerikanistenkongresses,  Wien  ig6o:  471-76. 

Hill,  James  N. 

1965.  Broken  K:  a prehistoric  community  in  eastern  Arizona.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of 
Chicago. 

1966.  A prehistoric  community  in  eastern  Arizona.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology,  22(1):  9-30. 
Hobhouse,  Leonard  Trelawny,  G.  C.  Wheeler,  and  M.  Ginsberg. 

1961.  The  material  culture  and  social  institutions  of  the  simpler  peoples:  an  essay  in  correlation.  In  F.  W. 
Moore  (Ed.),  Readings  in  cross-cultural  methodology.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Human  Relations  Area  Files  Press. 

Hockett,  Charles  F.,  and  Robert  Ascher. 

1964.  The  human  revolution.  Current  Anthropology  5(3) : 135-52. 

Hoijer,  Harry. 

1656.  Athapaskan  kinship  systems.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  58:  309-333. 

Hoijer,  Harry,  et  al. 

1963.  Studies  in  the  Athapaskan  languages.  University  of  California  Publications  in  Linguistics,  no.  29. 
Holdridge,  L.  R. 

1965.  The  tropics,  a misunderstood  ecosystem.  Association  for  Tropical  Biology  Bulletin,  5:  21-30. 

Holm,  G. 

1914.  Ethnological  sketch  of  the  Angmagssalik  Eskimos.  Meddelelser  om  Grenland,  39:  1 — 1 47 . 

Holmberg,  Allan  R. 

1950.  Nomads  of  the  long  bow:  the  Siriono  of  eastern  Bolivia.  Smithsonian  Institution,  Publications  of  the 
Institute  of  Social  Anthropology,  no.  10. 


References  369 


Honery,  Thomas. 

1878.  Wailwun  languages  and  traditions.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 

7:246-54. 

Honigmann,  John  J. 

1946.  Ethnography  and  acculturation  of  the  Fort  Nelson  Slave.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology, 
no.  33.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

1949.  Culture  and  ethos  of  Kasha  society.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  40.  New  Haven : 
Yale  University  Press. 

1954.  The  Kasha  Indians:  an  ethnographic  reconstruction.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no. 
51.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

1956.  The  Attawapiskat  Swampy  Cree:  an  ethnographic  reconstruction.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the 
University  of  Alaska,  5:  23-82. 

1962a.  Foodways  in  a Muskeg  community:  an  anthropological  report  on  the  Attawapiskat  Indians.  Northern 
Coordination  and  Research  Centre  Report,  no.  62.  Ottawa:  Department  of  Northern  Affairs  and 
Natural  Resources. 

1962b.  Social  networks  in  Great  Whale  River:  notes  on  an  Eskimo,  Montagnais-Naskapi,  and  Euro-Canadian 
community.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  no.  178. 

Hose,  C.,  and  W.  McDougall. 

1911.  The  pagan  tribes  of  Borneo  I:  a description  of  their  physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  condition  with  some 
discussion  of  their  ethic  relations.  London : Macmillan. 

Howell,  F.  C.,  G.  H.  Cole,  and  Maxine  R.  Kleindienst. 

1962.  Ismila:  an  Acheulian  occupation  site  on  the  Iringa  highlands,  Southern  Highlands  Province, 
Tanganyika.  Actes  du  IV e Congres  Panafricain  de  Prlhistoire,  1959  (Tervuren),  2:43-80. 

Howell,  F.  C.,  and  J.  Desmond  Clark. 

1963.  Acheulean  hunter-gatherers  of  sub-Saharan  Africa.  In  F.  C.  Howell  and  F.  Bourliere  (Eds.) 
African  ecology  and  human  evolution.  Chicago : Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

Howells,  W.  W. 

1965.  Some  present  aspects  of  physical  anthropology.  In  A.  Rose  (Ed.),  The  Negro  protest.  Annals  of  the 
American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,  357 : 1 27-33. 

Ho  WITT,  A.  W. 

1880.  The  Kurnai:  their  customs  in  peace  and  war.  In  Lorimer  Fison  and  A.  W.  Howitt,  Kamilaroi  and 
Kumai.  Melbourne:  G.  Robertson. 

1884.  On  some  Australian  ceremonies  of  initiation.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  13:  432-59. 

1885.  Australian  group  relations.  Annual  Report  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  for  the  year  1883:  797-824. 
1889a.  Further  notes  on  the  Australian  class  systems.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  18:  31-68. 

1889b.  Notes  on  Australian  message  sticks  and  messengers.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  18:  314-32. 

1891.  The  Dieri  and  other  kindred  tribes  of  central  Australia.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  20:  30-104. 

1904.  The  native  tribes  of  South-East  Australia.  London,  New  York:  Macmillan. 

Hughes,  Charles  C. 

i960.  An  Eskimo  village  in  the  modem  world.  Ithaca:  Cornell  University  Press. 

1965.  Under  four  flags:  recent  culture  change  among  the  Eskimo.  Current  Anthropology,  6(1) : 3-69. 
Huntingford,  G.  W.  B. 

1929.  Modern  hunters:  some  account  of  the  Kamelilo-Kapchepkendi  Dorobo  (Oriek)  of  Kenya  Colony. 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  69:  333-78. 

1942.  The  social  organization  of  the  Dorobo.  African  Studies,  1 : 183-200. 

1951.  The  social  institutions  of  the  Dorobo.  Anthropos,  46:  1-48. 

1 954.  The  political  organization  of  the  Dorobo.  Anthropos,  49 : 1 23-48. 

1955.  The  economic  life  of  the  Dorobo.  Anthropos,  50:  602-634. 


37°  References 
Hurlburt,  Janice. 

1962.  Age  as  a factor  in  the  social  organization  of  the  Hare  Indians  of  Fort  Good  Hope,  N-  W.  T.  Northern 
Coordination  and  Research  Centre  Report,  no.  5.  Ottawa : Department  of  Northern  Affairs  and  National 
Resources. 

Immenroth,  Wilhelm. 

1933.  Kultur  und  Umwelt  der  Kleinwiichsigen  in  Afrika.  Werkgemeinschaft  Studien  zur  Volkerkunde. 
(Leipzig),  6. 

Irvine,  F.  R. 

1957.  Wild  and  emergency  foods  of  Australian  and  Tasmanian  aborigines.  Oceania,  28:  1 13-42. 

Irving,  William  N. 

1953.  Evidence  of  early  Tundra  cultures  in  northern  Alaska.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  University  of 
Alaska,  1(2):  55-85. 

Isaac,  Glvnn  L. 

In  press  a.  Geological  history  of  the  Olorgesailie  area.  In  L.  D.  Cuscoy  (Ed.),  Adas  del  V Congreso  Pan- 
Africano  de  Prehistoria,  1963  (Tenerife). 

In  press  b.  New  evidence  from  Olorgesailie  relating  to  the  character  of  Acheulean  occupation  sites.  In 
L.  D.  Cuscoy  (Ed.),  Adas  del  V Congreso  Pan-Africano  de  Prehistorica,  1963  (Tenerife). 

1967.  Stratigraphy  of  the  Peninj  group,  (rev.)  In  W.  Bishop  and  J.  D.  Clark  (Eds.),  Background  of  African 
evolution.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Jackson,  Roy  I. 

1953.  Sockeye  from  the  Fraser.  The  Beaver  (Winnipeg),  March:  18-25. 

Jay,  Phyllis. 

1965.  Field  studies.  In  Allan  Schrier,  Harry  F.  Harlow,  and  Fred  Stollnitz  (Eds.),  Behavior  of  non-human 
primates  (vol.  2).  New  York,  London:  Academic  Press. 

Jenness,  Diamond. 

1922.  The  life  of  the  Copper  Eskimo.  Reports  of  the  Canadian  Arctic  Expeditions,  1913-18,  12.  Ottawa:  F.  A. 
Acland. 

1934.  Tribes  of  the  Mackenzie  and  Yukon  basins.  In  The  Indians  of  Canada.  Bulletin  of  the  National 
Museum  of  Canada,  no.  65:  377-422. 

Jenness,  Diamond  (Ed.). 

1956.  The  Chipewyan  Indians:  an  account  by  an  early  explorer.  Anthropologica,  3:  15-33. 

Jewett,  S.  G.,  et  al. 

1 953.  Birds  of  Washington  state.  Seattle:  University  of  Washington  Press. 

Jochelson,  W. 

The  Koryak.  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Memoir  10,  pt.  2. 

1926.  The  Tukaghir  and  Yukaghirized  Tungas.  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Memoir  13. 
Johnson,  Frederick  (Ed.). 

1946.  Man  in  northeastern  North  America.  Papers  of  the  Robert  S.  Peabody  Foundation  for  Archaeology 
(Andover),  no.  3. 

Johnston,  T.  Harvey. 

1940.  Some  aboriginal  routes  in  the  western  portion  of  South  Australia.  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Geographical 
Society  of  Australasia : South  Australian  Branch,  41 : 33-65. 

Jones,  Ernest. 

1925.  Mother-right  and  sexual  ignorance  of  savages.  International  Journal  of  Psychoanalysis , 6(2) : 109-130. 
Jones,  Frank  L. 

1963.  A demographic  survey  of  the  aboriginal  population  of  the  Northern  Territory,  with  special  reference  to  Bathurst 
Island  Mission.  Australian  Institute  of  Aboriginal  Studies,  Occasional  Papers  in  Aboriginal  Studies  (Canberra), 
no.  1 . 

1965.  The  demography  of  the  Australian  aborigines.  International  Social  Science  Journal,  17(2):  232-45 
Kaberry,  Phyllis  Mary. 

1937.  Subsections  in  east  and  south  Kimberley  tribes  of  northwest  Australia.  Oceania,  7:  436-58. 

1939.  Aboriginal  woman.  London:  George  Routledge. 


References  371 


Karsten,  Rafael. 

1932.  Indian  tribes  of  the  Argentine  and  Bolivian  Chaco.  Commentationes  Humanarum  Litter  arum,  4. 
Helsinki:  Societas  Scientarum  Fennica. 

1935.  The  head  hunters  of  the  western  Amazonas.  Helsinki:  Societas  Scientarum  Fennica. 

Kawamura,  Syunzo. 

1958.  The  matriarchal  social  order  in  the  Minoo-B  group:  a study  on  the  rank  system  of  Japanese 
macaqu e.  Primates  (Journal  of  Primatology)  1(2):  149-56  (Text  in  Japanese;  English  summary,  pp.  149- 
50). 

Keast,  A.,  R.  L.  Crocker,  and  C.  S.  Christian. 

1959.  Biogeography  and  ecology  in  Australia.  The  Hague:  W.  Junk 
Keith,  George. 

1890.  Letters  to  Mr.  Roderick  McKenzie,  1807-1817.  In  L.  R.  Masson  (Ed.),  Les  bourgeois  de  la  compagnie 
du  nord-ouest:  recitsde  voyages,  lettres,  et  rapports  inedits  relatifs  au  nord-ouest  canadien,  S£rie  2 : 61-132.  Quebec : 
A.  Cot6. 

Kelly,  Isabel  T. 

1964.  Southern  Paiute  ethnography.  University  of  Utah  Anthropological  Papers,  no.  69. 

Kendrew,  W.  G.,  and  D.  Kerr. 

1955.  The  climate  of  British  Columbia  and  the  Yukon  Territory.  Ottawa:  The  Queen’s  Printer. 

Kenton,  Edna  (Ed.). 

1927.  The  Indians  of  North  America.  In  The  Jesuit  relations  and  allied  documents : travels  and  explorations  of 
the  Jesuit  missionaries  in  New  France,  16 10-iygi . New  York:  Harcourt  Brace.  (First  published  Burrows,  1896.) 
King,  Richard. 

1836.  Narrative  of  a journey  to  the  shores  of  the  Arctic  Ocean  in  1833,  1834,  and  1833,  under  the  command  of 
Capt.  Back,  R.N.  2 vols.  London : R.  Bentley. 

Klein,  Richard  G. 

1965a.  The  middle  palaeolithic  ofthe  Crimea.  Arctic  Anthropology,  3(1):  34-68. 

1965b.  Dwelling-types  and  settlement  patterns  of  the  upper  Pleistocene  of  European  Russia.  Paper  presented  at 
American  Anthropological  Association,  Annual  Meetings,  Denver. 

Kleindienst,  Maxine  R. 

1961a.  The  composition  of  Late  Acheulian  assemblages  from  east  Africa.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation, 
University  of  Chicago. 

1961b.  Variability  within  the  Late  Acheulean  assemblage  in  eastern  Africa.  South  African  Archaeological 
Bulletin,  16(62):  35-52. 

Kleindienst,  Maxine  R.,  and  Patty  Jo  Watson. 

1956.  Action  archaeology:  the  archaeological  inventory  of  a living  community.  Anthropology  Tomorrow, 
5(0:  75-78. 

Knight,  Rolf. 

1965.  A re-examination  of  hunting,  trapping,  and  territoriality  among  the  northeastern  Algonkian 
Indians.  In  Anthony  Leeds  and  A.  P.  Vayda  (Eds.),  Man,  culture,  and  animals.  Washington,  D.C.  : 
American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  no.  78. 

Koford,  Carl  B. 

1966.  Population  changes  in  rhesus  monkeys:  Cayo  Santiago,  1960-1964.  Tulane  Studies  in  Z oology , 
13:  1-7. 

Kohl-Larsen,  Ludwig. 

1958.  Wildbeuter  in  Ostafrika,  die  Tindiga,  ein  J iigerund  Sammlervolk.  Berlin:  Dietrich  Reimer. 

Kraisri,  Nimmanahaeminda,  and  J.  Hartland-Swann. 

1962.  Expedition  to  the  “Khon  Pa.”  Journal  of  the  Siam  Society,  50:  165-86. 

Kroeber,  A.  L. 

1925.  Handbook  of  the  Indians  of  California.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Bulletin  no.  78. 

1931.  The  Seri.  Southwest  Museum  Papers,  no.  6. 

1938.  Basic  and  secondary  patterns  of  social  structure.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  68:  299-309.  (Also  in  The  nature  of  culture.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1952.) 


372  References 

1939.  Cultural  and  natural  areas  of  native  North  America.  University  of  California  Publications  in  American 
Archaeology  and  Ethnology  (Berkeley),  38. 

1945.  The  ancient  Oikeumene  as  a historic  culture  aggregate.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  75:9-20.  (Also  in  The  nature  of  culture.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  >952.) 
1955.  The  nature  of  the  land-holding  group.  Ethnohistory,  2:  303-314. 

Kroeber,  A.  L.,  and  S.  A.  Barrett. 

1960.  Fishing  among  the  Indians  of  northwestern  California.  Anthropological  Records  (Berkeley),  21(1). 
Krogman,  W.  M. 

1939.  Medical  practices  and  diseases  of  the  aboriginal  American  Indians.  CIBA  Symposia,  1 : 1 1 — 18. 

Krz  ywicki,  Ludwik. 

1934.  Primitive  society  and  its  vital  statistics.  Trans,  by  H.  E.  Kennedy  and  A.  Truszkowski.  London: 
Macmillan. 

Kuhn,  Thomas  S. 

1962.  The  structure  of  scientific  revolutions.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Kummer,  H.,  and  F.  Kurt. 

1963.  Social  units  of  a free-living  population  of  Hamadryas  baboons.  Folia  Primatologica,  1 : 4-19. 
Kunstadter,  Peter,  Roald  Buhler,  Frederick  Staphan,  and  Charles  Westoff. 

1963.  Demographic  variability  and  preferential  marriage  patterns.  American  Journal  of  Physical  Anthropology 
(n.s.),  21:  511-19. 

Lack,  David. 

1954.  The  natural  regulation  of  animal  numbers.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

1 966.  Population  studies  of  birds.  Oxford : Clarendon  Press. 

Lancaster,  Jane  B. 

1968.  The  evolution  of  tool-using  behavior:  primate  field  studies,  fossil  apes  and  the  archaeological  record. 

American  Anthropologist  70:  56-66. 

Landes,  Ruth. 

1937a.  Ojibwa  sociology.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press. 

1937b.  The  Ojibwa  of  Canada.  In  Margaret  Mead  (Ed.),  Cooperation  and  competition  among  primitive  peoples. 
New  York,  London:  McGraw-Hill. 

Lane,  Barbara  S. 

1961.  Structural  contrasts  between  symmetric  and  asymmetric  marriage  systems:  a fallacy.  Southwestern 
Journal  of  Anthropology,  17:  49-55. 

1962  Jural  authority  and  affinal  exchange.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology,  18:  184-97. 

Lanning,  Edward  P.,  and  Eugene  A.  Hammel. 

1961.  Early  lithic  industries  of  western  South  America.  American  Antiquity,  27(2) : 139-54. 

Lantis,  Mar'garet. 

1946.  The  social  culture  of  the  Nunivak  Eskimo.  Transactions  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society  (n.s.), 
35(3):  I5I-323- 

Larsen,  Helge,  and  Froelich  Rainey. 

1948.  Ipiutak  and  the  Arctic  whale  hunting  culture.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History,  no.  42. 

Lasker,  G.  W.  (Ed.). 

i960.  The  processes  of  ongoing  human  evolution.  Detroit:  Wayne  State  University  Press. 

Lathrap,  Donald  W. 

1958.  The  cultural  sequence  at  Yarinacocha, eastern  Peru.  American  Antiquity,  23(4) : 379-88. 

1962.  Yarinacocha:  stratigraphic  excavations  in  the  Peruvian  Montafla.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation. 
Harvard  University. 

1963.  Possible  affiliations  of  the  Mach  alilla  complex  of  coastal  Ecuador. American  Antiquity,  29(2) : 239-41. 
1965a.  Origins  of  central  Andean  civilization:  new  evidence  (review  of  Andes  s:  Excavations  at  Kotosh, 
Peru,  ig6o,  by  Izumi  and  Sono).  Science,  148(3671):  796-98. 

1965b.  Investigaciones  en  la  Selva  Peruana,  1964-1965.  Boletin  del  Museo  Nacional  de  Antropologia  y 
Arqueologia  (Lima),  4:  9-12. 


References  373 

1970.  The  upper  Amazon:  Ancient  peoples  and  places.  London:  Thames  and  Hudson. 

Lauohlin,  William  S. 

1957.  Blood  groups  of  the  Anaktuvuk  Eskimos,  Alaska.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  University  of  Alaska, 
6(0:2-15. 

1961.  Acquisition  of  anatomical  knowledge  by  ancient  man.  In  S.  L.  Washburn  (Ed.),  Social  life  of  early 
man.  Chicago : Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

1963a.  Primitive  theory  of  medicine:  empirical  knowledge.  In  Iago  Galdston  (Ed.),  Man’s  image  in 
medicine  and  anthropology.  Institute  of  Social  and  Historic  Medicine,  Monograph  4:  116-40.  New  York: 
The  New  Academy  of  Medicine. 

1963b.  Eskimos  and  Aleuts:  their  origins  and  evolution.  Science,  142(3593):  633-45. 

1 966.  Essential  scientific  activities  preliminary  to  full  term  biological  studies  of  isolate  groups.  Paper  presented  at 
Wenner-Gren  Burg  Wartenstein  Conference.  (Unpublished). 

1967.  Human  migration  and  permanent  occupation  in  the  Bering  Sea  area.  In  D.  M.  Hopkins  (Ed.), 
The  Bering  land  bridge.  Stanford : Stanford  University  Press. 

Lawick,  Hugo  von,  and  Jane  von  Lawick-Goodall. 

1966.  Family  life  in  chimpland  (16mm  film).  Washington  D.C. : National  Geographic  Society. 

Lawrence,  William. 

1937.  Alternating  generations  in  Australia.  In  G.  P.  Murdock  (Ed.),  Studies  in  the  science  of  society: 
presented  to  Albert  Galloway  Keller.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

Leach,  E.  R. 

1951.  The  structural  implications  of  matrilateral  cross-cousin  marriage.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthro- 
pological Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  81 : 23-55. 

1954.  Political  systems  of  Highland  Burma : a study  of  Kachin  social  structure.  London : G.  Bell  and  Sons,  Ltd. 
1961.  Pul  Eliya,  a village  in  Ceylon:  a study  of  land  tenure  and  kinship.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University 
Press. 

1965a.  Unilateral  cross-cousin  marriage.  Man,  65:  25 

1 965b.  Claude  L^vi-Strauss — anthropologist  and  philosopher.  New  Left  Review,  34. 

Leacock,  Eleanor  B. 

1954.  The  Montagnais  “ hunting  territory ” and  fur  trade.  American  Anthropological  Association  Memoir, 
no.  78. 

1955.  Matrilocality  in  a simple  hunting  economy  (Montagnais-Naskapi).  Southwestern  Journal  of 
Anthropology,  1 1 : 31-47. 

Leakey,  L.  S.  B. 

1952.  The  Olorgesailie  prehistoric  site.  First  Pan- African  congress  on  prehistory  (Nairobi),  1947:  209. 
i960.  Adam's  ancestors.  (4th  ed.)  New  York:  Harper  Torchbooks. 

1965.  Comment  in  symposium.  In  Paul  DeVore  (Ed.),  The  origin  of  man.  Transcript  of  a symposium 
sponsored  by  Wenner-Gren  Foundation  for  Anthropological  Research. 

LeBar,  Frank  M.,  Gerald  C.  Hickey,  and  John  K.  Musgrave. 

1964.  Ethnic  groups  of  mainland  Southeast  Asia.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Human  Relations  Area  Files  Press. 
Lee,  Richard  B. 

1963.  The  population  ecology  of  man  in  the  early  Upper  Pleistocene  of  southern  Africa.  Proceedings  of  the 
Prehistoric  Society  (n.s.),  29:  235-57. 

1965.  Subsistence  ecology  of  IKung  Bushmen.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley. 

1968.  The  sociology  of  Bushman  trance  performances.  In  Raymond  Prince  (Ed.),  Trance  and  possession 
states.  Montreal,  pp.  35-54. 

ig69-  !Kung  Bushman  subsistence:  input-output  analysis.  In  A.  P.  Vayda  (Ed.),  Environment  and 
Cultural  Behavior,  New  York:  Natural  History  Press,  pp.  43-79. 

Lehman,  F.  K. 

1963.  The  structure  of  Chin  society : a tribal  people  of  Burma  adapted  to  a non-Westem  civilization.  Illinois  Studies 
in  Anthropology,  no.  3.  Urbana : University  of  Illinois  Press. 

Lenski,  Gerhard. 

1966.  Power  and  privilege:  a theory  of  social  stratification.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 


3 74  References 
Leshnik,  Lorenz  S. 

1964.  Sociological  interpretation  in  archaeology : some  examples  from  a village  study  in  central  India.  Unpublished 
doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Chicago. 

Le  Souef,  Albert  A.  C. 

1878.  Notes  on  the  natives  of  Australia.  In  R.  B.  Smyth  (Ed.),  The  aborigines  of  Victoria:  with  notes  relating 
to  the  habits  of  the  natives  of  other  parts  of  Australia  and  Tasmania,  2:  289-99.  Melbourne:  J.  Ferres. 
Levi-Strauss,  Claude. 

1936.  Contribution  a l’etude  de  l’organisation  sociale  des  Indiens  Bororo.  Journal  de  la  Societe  des  Ameri- 
canistes  (Paris)  (n.s.),  28:  269-304. 

1940.  Le  vie  familiale  et  sociale  des  Indiens  Nambikwara.  Journal  de  la  Societe  des  Americanistes  (Paris) 
(n.s.),  38:  1-131. 

1949.  Les  structures  eUmentaires  de  la  parente.  Paris:  Presses  Universitaires  de  France. 

1 952.  La  notion  de’archaisme  en  ethnologie.  Cahiers  1 nternationaux  de  Sociologie,  1 2 : 32-35. 

1958.  Anthropologie  structurale.  Paris:  Plon.  (Also  Structural  Anthropology.  Trans,  by  Claire  Jacobson  and 
Brooke  Schoepf.  New  York,  London:  Basic  Books,  1963.) 

i960.  On  manipulated  sociological  models.  Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkunde,  1 16(1):  45-54. 
1966.  The  scope  of  anthropology.  Current  Anthropology,  7(2):  1 12-23. 

Levine,  Morton  H. 

1957.  Prehistoric  art  and  ideology.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  59(6):  949-64. 

Linne,  Sigvald. 

1957.  Technical  secrets  of  American  Indians.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  87(2):  149-64. 

Linton,  Ralph. 

1936.  The  study  of  man.  New  York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts. 

■953-  Comments  in  symposium.  In  Sol  Tax  et  al.  (Eds.),  An  appraisal  of  anthropology  today.  Chicago: 
University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Lips,  Julius  E. 

1 939.  Naskapi  trade:  a study  in  legal  acculturation.  Journal  de  la  Societe  des  Americanistes  (Paris)  (n.s.), 
3i:  '29-95- 

1947a.  Naskapi  law.  Transactions  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society  (n.s.),  37(4) : 379-492. 

1947b.  Zelte  in  der  Wildnis : Indianerleben  in  Labrador.  Vienna:  Danubia. 

Livi,  Livio. 

1949.  Considerations  theoriques  et  pratiques  sur  le  concept  de  “minimum  de  population.”  Population 
(Paris),  4:  754-56. 

Livingstone,  Frank  B. 

1958.  Anthropological  implications  of  sickle  cell  gene  distribution  in  West  Africa.  American  Anthropologist 
(n.s.),  60:  533-62. 

i960.  Natural  selection,  disease,  and  ongoing  evolution,  as  illustrated  by  the  ABO  blood  groups.  In  G.W. 
Lasker  (Ed.),  The  processes  of  ongoing  human  evolution.  Detroit:  Wayne  State  University  Press. 

Longacre,  William  A. 

1963.  Archaeology  as  anthropology : a case  study.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Chicago. 
1964a.  Archaeology  as  anthropology:  a case  study.  Science,  144(3625) : 1454-55. 

1964b.  Sociological  implications  of  the  ceramic  analysis.  In  P.  S.  Martin  et  al.  (Eds.),  Chapters  in  the 
prehistory  of  eastern  Arizona,  2,  Fieldiana  Anthropology,  55:  155-70. 

1966.  Changing  patterns  of  social  integration:  a prehistoric  example  from  the  American  Southwest. 
American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(1):  94-102. 

Longacre,  William  A.,  and  James  E.  Ayres. 

1966.  Archaeological  theory:  some  lessons  from  an  Apache  wickiup.  Paper  presented  at  31st  Annual  Meeting  of 
the  Society  for  American  Archaeology,  Reno,  Nevada. 

Lorenz,  Konrad  Z. 

1966.  On  aggression.  Trans,  by  Marjorie  K.  Wilson.  New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace  and  World. 


References  375 


Lorimer,  Frank. 

1954.  Culture  and  human  fertility;  a study  of  the  relation  of  cultural  conditions  to  fertility  in  non-industrial  and 
transitional  societies.  Paris : Unesco. 

Lothrop,  S.  K. 

1928.  The  Indians  of  Tierra  delFuego . Contributions  of  the  Museum  of  the  American  Indian,  Heye  Founda- 
tion. New  York:  Heye  Foundation. 

Lounsbury,  Floyd  G. 

1962.  (Review  of)  Structure  and  sentiment:  a test  case  in  social  anthropology.  American  Anthropologist (n.s.) , 
64(6):  1302-1310. 

1 964.  A formal  account  of  the  Crow-  and  Omaha-type  kinship  terminologies.  In  Ward  H.  Goodenough 
(Ed.),  Explorations  in  cultural  anthropology : essays  in  honor  of  George  Peter  Murdock.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Lowie,  Robert  H. 

1948.  The  tropical  forests,  an  introduction.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians, 
vol.  3 ‘.The  tropical  forest  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin,  143(3):  1-56. 

1952.  The  heterogeneity  of  marginal  cultures.  In  Sol  Tax  (Ed.),  Selected  papers  of  the  sgth  international 
congress  of  Americanists,  3:  1-7.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

1963.  Indians  of  the  Plains.  New  York:  American  Museum  Science  Books.  (First  published  as  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History  Anthropological  Handbook,  no.  1.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1954.) 

Lumholz,  Carl. 

1889.  Among  cannibals : an  account  of four  years’  travels  in  Australia  and  of  camp  life  with  the  aborigines  of  Queens- 
land. Trans,  by  R.  B.  Anderson.  New  York:  Scribner’s. 

McCarthy,  Frederick  D. 

1945.  Catalogue  of  the  aboriginal  relics  of  New  South  Wales,  pt.  3:  carved  trees  or  dendroglyphs. 
Mankind,  3:  199-206. 

1957a.  Australia's  aborigines:  their  life  and  culture.  Melbourne:  Cologravure. 

1957b.  Distributional  notes  on  Northern  Australian  point  industries.  Mankind,  5:  163-68. 

1957c.  Habitat,  economy  and  equipment  of  the  Australian  aborigines.  Australian  Journal  of  Science,  19:  88-97. 
McCarthy,  Frederick  D.,  and  Margaret  McArthur. 

i960.  The  food  quest  and  the  time  factor  in  aboriginal  economic  life.  In  Charles  P.  Mountford  (Ed.), 
Records  of  the  American- Australian  scientific  expedition  to  Arnhem  Land,  vol.  2 : anthropology  and  nutrition. 
Melbourne:  Melbourne  University  Press. 

McConnell,  Ursula  H. 

1930-34.  The  Wik-Munkan  and  allied  tribes  of  Cape  York  Peninsula.  Oceania,  1 : 97-104,  181-205;  4: 
310-67. 

MacDonald,  George. 

1965.  On  the  scientific  basis  of  tropical  hygiene.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Tropical  Medicine  and 
Hygiene,  59:  611-20. 

McGee,  W.  J. 

1898.  The  Seri  Indians.  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  vol.  17  (for  1895-96): 
1-128,  129-344. 

McIlwraith,  Thomas  F. 

1948.  The  Bella  Coola  Indians.  Toronto:  University  of  Toronto  Press. 

McKennan,  Robert  A. 

1959.  The  Upper  Tanana  Indians.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  55.  New  Haven: 
Yale  University  Press. 

1965.  The  Chandalar  Kutchin.  Arctic  Institute  of  North  America  Technical  Paper,  no.  17. 

McKenzie,  Alexander. 

1801.  Voyages  from  Montreal,  on  the  River  St.  Lawrence,  through  the  continent  of  North  America,  to  the  Frozen  and 
Pacific  Oceans:  in  the  years  ip8g  and  ipg3.  London:  T.  Cadell,  jun.,  and  W.  Davies. 

McKenzie,  Roderic. 

1795.  An  account  of  the  Athabasca  Indians  by  a partner  of  the  North  West  Company.  In  Some  account  of 
the  North  West  Company  containing  analogy  of  nations  ancient  and  modern,  Athabasca,  1795,  pt.  3.  Massen 


3 76  References 

Collection,  MS  Group  19,  Fur  trade  and  Indians,  1763-1867.  MS  Division,  Public  Archives  of  Canada. 
1889.  Reminiscences.  In  L.  R.  Masson  (Ed.),  Les  bourgeois  de  la  compagnie  du  nord-ouest:  recits  de  voyages, 
lettres  et  rapports  inedits  relatifs  au  nord-ouest  canadien,  Serie  1 : 7-66.  Quebec : A.  Cote. 

McLean,  John. 

1932.  John  McLean's  notes  of  a twenty-five  years'  service  in  the  Hudson's  Bay  Territory.  Ed.  by  VV.  S.  Wallace. 
Toronto:  Champlain  Society. 

Mac.Neish,  June  Helm. 

1954.  Contemporary  folk  beliefs  of  a Slave  Indian  band.  Journal  of  American  Folklore,  67:  185-98. 

1955.  Folktales  of  the  Slave  Indians.  Anthropologica,  1:  37-44. 

1956a.  (Ed.).  “Field  notes  on  Tahltan  and  Kaska  Indians:  1912-1915”  by  J.  A.  Teit.  Anthropologica, 
3:  39-171- 

1956b.  Leadership  among  the  northeastern  Athapaskans.  Anthropologica,  2:  131-63. 

1956c.  Problems  of  acculturation  and  livelihood  in  a northern  Indian  band.  Contributions  a l’ Etude  des 
Sciences  de  l' Homme  (Montreal),  3:  169-81. 

■957-  (Ed.).  The  Poole  Field  letters.  Anthropologica,  4:  47-60. 

1960a.  Kin  terms  of  arctic  drainage  Dene:  Hare,  Slavey,  Chipewyan.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.), 
62:  279-95. 

1960b.  Les  Indiens  Dene  de  la  foret  subarctique.  Science  et  Nature,  41  : 31-37. 

Mac.Nfish,  Richard  Stockton. 

1964.  The  food  gathering  and  incipient  agriculture  stage  of  prehistoric  Middle  America.  In  Robert  C. 
West  (Ed.),  Natural  environment  and  early  cultures.  Austin:  University  of  Texas  Press. 

Macquarie,  C. 

1940.  Water  gypsies  of  the  Malagarasi.  Tanganyika  Notes  and  Records,  g:  61-67. 

McPhfrron,  Ai.an. 

1965.  Ionic  removal  of  corrosion  from  copper.  Alichigan  Archaeologist,  1 1(2):  53-56. 

Mainoard,  J.  F. 

■937-  Somes  notes  on  health  and  disease  among  the  Bushmen  of  the  southern  Kalahari.  In  J.  D.  Jones 
et  al.  (Eds.),  Bushmen  of  the  southern  Kalahari.  Johannesburg:  University  of  Witwaterstrand  Press. 

Mair,  Lucy. 

1965.  An  introduction  to  social  anthropology.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press. 

Majumdar,  Dhirendra  Nath. 

1944.  The  fortunes  of  primitive  tribes.  Lucknow:  Universal  Publishers. 

Malinowski,  Bronislaw. 

i960.  A scientific  theory  of  culture.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press.  (First  published  Chapel  Hill: 
University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1944.) 

1955.  Sex  and  repression  in  savage  society.  New  York:  Meridian  Books. 

Man,  Edward  Horace. 

1883.  On  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands.  London  : Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  Trubner. 

Mann,  G.  V.,  O.  A.  Roels,  D.  L.  Price,  and  J.  M.  Merrill. 

1962.  Cardiovascular  disease  in  African  Pygmies.  A survey  of  the  health  status,  serum  lipids,  and  diet  of 
Pygmies  in  Congo.  Journal  oj  Chronic  Diseases,  15:  341-71. 

Manning,  T.  H. 

1943.  Notes  on  the  coastal  district  of  the  eastern  Barren  Grounds  and  Melville  Peninsular  from  Igloolik 
to  Cape  Fullerton.  Canadian  Geographical  Journal,  26:  84-105. 

Marcoy,  Paul  (pseud.  Laurent  Saint-Cricq). 

1873.  A journey  across  South  America  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  (2  vols.).  Trans,  by  Elihu  Rich. 
London:  Bladkie  and  Son. 

Marsh,  Gordon  H. 

1954.  A comparative  survey  of  Eskimo-Aleut  religion.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  University  of  Alaska, 
3(0  : 21-36. 


References  377 


Marsh,  Gordon  H.,  and  William  S.  Laughlin. 

1956.  Human  anatomical  knowledge  among  the  Aleutian  Islanders.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology , 
12(1):  38-78. 

Marshall,  John. 

1956.  The  hunters.  (16mm  film.)  Cambridge:  Film  Study  Center  of  the  Peabody  Museum,  Harvard 
University. 

Marshall,  Lorna 

1957.  The  kin  terminology  system  of  the  IKung  Bushmen.  Africa,  27:  1-25. 

1959.  Marriage  among  IKung  Bushmen.  Africa,  29:  335-65. 

1960.  IKung  Bushman  bands.  Africa,  30:  325-55. 

1961.  Sharing,  talking  and  giving:  relief  of  social  tensions  among  IKung  Bushmen.  Africa,  31 : 231-49. 

1962.  IKung  Bushman  religious  beliefs.  Africa,  32:  221-52. 

1965.  The  IKung  Bushmen  of  the  Kalahari  Desert.  In  James  Gibbs  (Ed.),  Peoples  of  Africa.  New  York: 
Holt,  Rinehart,  and  Winston. 

Mason,  J.  Alden. 

1 946.  Notes  on  the  Indians  of  the  Great  Slave  Lake  area.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  34. 
New  Haven : Y ale  University  Press. 

Mason,  Ronald  J. 

1962.  The  Paleo-Indian  tradition  in  eastern  North  America.  Current  Anthropology,  3(3):  227-78. 

Massola,  Aldo. 

1956a.  Australian  fishhooks  and  their  distribution.  Memoirs  of  the  National  Museum  of  Victoria,  22(1):  1-16. 
1956b.  Victorian  aboriginal  strangling  cords.  Memoirs  of  the  National  Museum  of  Victoria,  22(3) : 1-4. 
Mathews,  Robert  H. 

1894.  Aboriginal  Bora  held  at  Gundabloui  in  1894.  Journal  and  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  New  South 
Wales,  28:  98-129. 

1895.  The  Bora,  or  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribe.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  24:  411-27. 

1896a.  Australian  class  systems.  American  Anthropologist  (o.s.),  9:  411-16. 

1896b.  Australian  ground  and  tree  drawings.  American  Anthropologist  (o.s.),  9:  33-49. 

1 896c.  The  Bora, or  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribe,  pt.  2.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  25:  318-39. 

l896d.  The  Burbung  of  the  Wiradthuri  tribes.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  25:  295-318. 

1897a.  Australian  class  systems.  American  Anthropologist  (o.s.),  10:  345-47. 

1897b.  The  Bora  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes.  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Victoria  (n.s.),  9:  137-73. 

1897c.  The  Burbung  of  the  Wiradthuri  tribes,  pt.  2.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  26:  272-85. 

18978.  The  Burbung,  or  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Murrumbidgee  tribes.  Journal  and  Proceedings  of  the 
Royal  Society  of  New  South  Wales,  31:11 1-53. 

1897c.  The  totemic  division  of  Australian  tribes.  Journal  and  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  New  South 
Wales,  31:  154-76. 

1904.  Ethnological  notes  on  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  New  South  Wales  and  Victoria.  Journal  and  Pro- 
ceedings of  the  Royal  Society  of  New  South  Wales,  38:  203-381. 

Mathiassen,  Therkel. 

1928.  Material  culture  of  the  Iglulik  Eskimos.  Report  of  the  Fifth  Thule  Expedition  r gar-24,  6(1). 
Copenhagen : Gyldendalske  boghandel. 

Mauss,  Marcel. 

1906.  Essai  sur  les  variations  saisonnteres  des  soci^t^s  eskimos:  £tude  de  morphologie  sociale.  L' Annie 
Sociologique,  9:  39-132. 

Maybury-Lewis,  David. 

1967.  Akwe-Shavante  society.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press. 


378  References 

Mayr,  Ernst. 

1963.  Animal  species  and  evolution.  Cambridge:  Belknap  Press  (Harvard  University  Press). 

Meggers,  Betty  J. 

1954.  Environmental  limitation  on  the  development  of  culture.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  56: 801-824. 
1957a.  Environment  and  culture  in  the  Amazon  Basin:  an  appraisal  of  the  theory  of  environmental 
determinism.  In  Angel  Palerm etal.  (Eds.),  Studies  in  human  ecology.  Pan  American  Union  , Social  Science 
Monographs  3:  no.  71-89. 

1957b.  Environmental  limitation  on  Maya  culture:  a reply  to  Coe.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  59: 
888-90. 

Meggers,  Betty  J.,  and  Clifford  Evans,  Jr. 

1956.  The  reconstruction  of  settlement  pattern  in  the  South  American  tropical  forest.  In  Gordon  R. 
Willey  (Ed.),  Prehistoric  settlement  patterns  in  the  New  World.  Viking  Fund  Publications  in  Anthropology 
no.  23.  : 1 56- 1 64. 

1961.  An  experimental  formulation  of  horizon  styles  in  the  tropical  forest  area  of  South  America.  In 
S.  K.  Lothrop  et  al.  (Eds.),  Essays  in  pre-Columbian  art  and  archaeology.  Cambridge : Harvard  University  Press. 

Meggitt,  M.  J. 

1957.  Notes  on  the  vegetable  foods  of  the  Walbiri  of  central  Australia.  Oceania,  28:  143-45. 

1958.  The  Enga  of  the  New  Guinea  highlands.  Oceania,  28:  253-330. 

1962.  Desert  people : a study  of  the  Walbiri  aborigines  of  central  Australia.  Sydney:  Angus  and  Robertson. 
1964a.  Indigenous  forms  of  government  among  the  Australian  aborigines.  Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal-,  Land-, 
en  Volkenkunde,  120:  163-80. 

1964b.  Pre-industrial  man  in  the  tropical  environment:  aboriginal  food-gatherers  of  tropical  Australia. 
Proceedings  and  Papers  of  the  Ninth  Technical  Meeting  I.U.C.N.,  Nairobi,  Kenya,  1963.  Morges  (Vaud), 
Switzerland:  International  Union  for  the  Conservation  of  Nature  and  Natural  Resources. 

1965a.  The  association  between  Australian  aborigines  and  dingoes.  In  A.  Leeds  and  A.  P.  Vayda  (Eds.). 
Man,  culture,  and  animals:  the  role  of  animals  in  human  ecological  adjustments.  Washington,  D.C.:  American 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science. 

1965b.  Marriage  among  the  Walbiri  of  central  Australia:  a statistical  examination.  In  R.  M.  Berndt 
and  C.  H.  Berndt  (Eds.) , Aboriginal  man  in  Australia : essays  in  honor  of  Emeritus  Professor  A.  P.  Elkin.  Sydney : 
Angus  and  Robertson. 

Menovshchikov,  G.  A. 

1956.  Eskimosi  (The  Eskimos).  In  M.  G.  Levin  and  L.  P.  Potov  (Eds.),  Narody  Sibiri  {Peoples  of  Siberia) . 
Moscow:  Russian  Academy  of  Sciences.  (Also  trans.  by  C.  C.  Hughes.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  University 
of  Alaska  [1964],  12:  1— 1 3.) 

Merbs,  Charles  F.,  and  W.  H.  Wilson. 

1962.  Anomalies  and  pathologies  of  the  Sadlermiut  Eskimo  vertebral  column.  In  Contributions  to 
Anthropology,  i960,  pt.  1.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  180:  154-80. 

Merker,  M. 

1904.  Die  Masai.  Berlin:  Dietrich  Reimer. 

Metraux,  Alfred. 

1937.  Etudes  d’ethnographie  Toba-Pilaga  (Gran  Chaco).  Anthropos,  32:  171-94,  378-401. 

1948a.  Tribes  of  the  middle  and  upper  Amazon  River.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American 
Indians,  vol.  3 -.The  tropical  forest  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin,  143(3):  687-712. 

1948b.  The  hunting  and  gathering  tribes  of  the  Rio  Negro  Basin.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of 
South  American  Indians,  vol.  3 :The  tropical  forest  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin,  143(3): 
861-67. 

Michea,  Jean. 

1963.  Les  Chitra-Gottin£k£ : essaie  de  monographic  d’un  groupe  Athapascan  des  montagnes  Rocheuses. 
In  Contributions  to  anthropology  i960,  pt.  2.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  190:  49-93. 

Mioliazza,  E. 

1964.  Notas  sobre  a organizaQao  social  dos  Xiriana  do  Rio  Uraricad.  Boletim  do  Museu  Paraense  Emilio 
Gotldi  (Belem,  Brazil)  (n.s.),  22:  1-22. 


References  379 


Momsen,  Richard  P.,  Jr. 

1964.  The  Isconahua  Indians:  a study  of  change  and  diversity  in  the  Peruvian  Amazon.  Revista  Geografica , 
32(60):  59-81. 

Moodie,  Donald  (Ed.). 

1838-42.  The  record;  or  a series  of  official  papers  relative  to  the  condition  and  treatment  of  the  native  tribes  of  South 
Africa , pts.  1,  3,  5.  Cape  Town:  A.  S.  Robertson.  (Also  phototastic  reprint  of  i860  edition.  Amsterdam  : 
Balkema,  and  Cape  Town:  A.  S.  Robertson,  i960.) 

Mooney,  James. 

1928.  The  aboriginal  population  of  America  north  of  Mexico.  Smithsonian  Miscellaneous  Collections,  80(7) : 
Moore,  Omar  K. 

1957.  Divination — a new  perspective.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  59:  69-74. 

Morey,  Robert. 

1967.  Unpublished  field  notes  on  the  Guahibo.  University  of  Pittsburgh. 

Morgan,  John. 

1852.  The  life  and  adventures  of  William  Buckley,  thirty-two  years  a wanderer  amongst  the  aborigines  of  the  then 
unexplored  country  round  Port  Phillip,  now  the  Province  of  Victoria.  Hobart,  Tasmania:  A.  Macdougall. 
Morgan,  Lewis  Henry. 

1870.  Systems  of  consanguinity  and  affinity  of  the  human  family.  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge, 
no.  17. 

1880.  Prefatory  note.  In  Lorimer  Fison  and  A.  W.  Howitt  (Eds.),  Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai.  Melbourne: 
G.  Robertson. 

Morice,  Adrien  G. 

1906-10.  The  great  Dene  race.  Anthropos,  1:  229-77,  483-508,  695-730;  2:  1-34,  181-96;  4:  582-606; 
5:  113-42,  419-43,  643-53,  969-90. 

Motulsky,  Arno  G. 

i960.  Metabolic  polymorphisms  and  the  role  of  infectious  diseases  in  human  evolution.  In  G.  W.  Lasker 
(Ed.),  The  processes  of  ongoing  human  evolution.  Detroit:  Wayne  State  University  Press. 

Movius,  Hallam  L.,  Jr. 

1966.  The  hearths  of  the  Upper  Perigordian  and  Aurignacian  horizons  at  the  Abri  Pataud,  Les  Eyzies 
(Dordogne),  and  their  possible  significance.  In  J.  D.  Clark  and  F.  C.  Howell  (Eds.),  Recent  studies  in 
paleoanthropology.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(2),  pt.  2. 

Munro,  J.  A.,  and  Ian  McTaggart  Cowan. 

1947.  A review  of  the  bird  fauna  of  British  Columbia.  British  Columbia  Provincial  Museum  Special 
Publication,  no.  2. 

Murdoch,  J. 

1892.  Ethnological  results  of  the  Point  Barrow  expedition.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Annual  Report  9 
(for  1887-88). 

Murdock,  George  Peter. 

1949.  Social  structure.  New  York:  Macmillan. 

i960.  Ethnographic  bibliography  of  North  America.  (3d  ed.)  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Human  Relations  Area 
Files  Press. 

1967.  The  ethnographic  atlas:  a summary.  Ethnology,  6(2). 

Murphy,  Robert  F. 

i960.  Headhunted s heritage:  social  and  economic  change  among  the  Mundurucu  Indians.  Berkeley:  University  of 
California  Press. 

Murphy,  Robert  F.,  and  Buell  Quain. 

1955.  The  Trumai  Indians  of  Central  Brazil.  American  Ethnological  Society  Monograph  no.  24.  Seattle: 
University  of  Washington  Press. 

Murphy,  Robert  F.,  and  Julian  H.  Steward. 

!955.  Tappers  and  trappers:  parallel  process  in  acculturation.  Economic  Development  and  Cultural  Change, 

4:  335-55- 


380  References 

Nadel,  S.  F. 

1951.  The  foundations  of  social  anthropology.  Glencoe,  111. : The  Free  Press. 

Napier,  John  R. 

1962.  Monkeys  and  their  habitats.  New  Scientist,  15:  88-92. 

Naroll,  Raoul  S. 

1962.  Floor  area  and  settlement  population.  American  Antiquity,  27(4):  587-89. 

Needham,  Rodney. 

1954.  Siriono  and  Penan:  a test  of  some  hypotheses.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology,  10(3) : 228-32. 

1961.  An  analytical  note  on  the  structure  of  Siriono  society.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology,  17(3): 
239-55- 

Neel,  James  V. 

1962.  Diabetes  Mellitus:  a “thrifty”  genotype  rendered  detrimental  by  progress?  American  Journal  of 
Human  Genetics,  14(4):  353-62. 

Neel,  James  V.,  F.  M.  Salzano,  P.  C.  Junqueira,  F.  Keiter,  and  D.  Maybury-Lewis. 

1964.  Studies  on  the  Xavante  Indians  of  the  Brazilian  Mato  Grosso.  American  Journal  of  Human  Genetics, 
16(1):  52-140. 

Nelson,  Edward  W. 

1899.  The  Eskimo  about  the  Bering  Strait.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Annual  Report  18  (for  1896-97). 
Nelson,  Richard  King. 

In  press.  Alaskan  Eskimo  exploitation  of  the  sea  ice  environment.  Technical  Notes  of  the  U.S.  Arctic 
Aeromedical  Laboratory  (Fort  Wainwright,  Alaska). 

Niblack,  Albert  P. 

1890.  The  coast  Indians  of  southern  Alaska  and  northern  British  Columbia.  Annual  Report  of  the  U.S.  National 
Museum  for  1888:  225-386. 

Nimuendaju,  Curt. 

1939.  The  Apinaye.  Trans,  by  Robert  Lowie.  Washington,  D.C. : Catholic  University  of  America  Press. 
1942.  The  Serente.  Trans,  by  Robert  Lowie.  Los  Angeles:  Southwest  Museum. 

1946.  The  Eastern  Timbira.  Trans,  and  ed.  by  Robert  Lowie.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 
1952a.  The  Tapajo.  Trans,  and  ed.  by  J.  H.  Rowe.  Kroeber  Anthropological  Society  Papers,  no.  6.:  1-25. 
1952b.  The  Tukuna.  Trans,  by  W.  D.  Hohenthal  and  ed.  by  Robert  Lowie.  University  of  California 
Publications  in  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology  (Berkeley),  45. 

Noble,  G.  Kingsley. 

1965.  Proto- Arawakan  and  its  descendants.  Indiana  University  Publications  in  Anthropology  and  Linguistics, 
no.  38. 

Noone,  Herbert  D. 

1936.  Report  on  the  settlements  and  welfare  of  the  Ple-Temiar  Senoi  of  the  Perak-Kelantan  watershed. 
Journal  of  the  Federal  Malay  States  Museum,  19(1). 

Nordenskiold,  Erl  and. 

igig. .An  ethno-geographical  analysis  of  the  material  culture  of  two  Indian  tribes  in  the  Gran  Chaco.  Trans,  by 
G.  E.  Fuhrken.  Comparative  Ethnological  Studies  (Goteborg),  no.  1. 

Oakley,  Kenneth  P. 

1958.  Man  the  tool-maker.  (4th  ed.)  London:  British  Museum.  (First  published  1949.) 

1961.  On  man’s  use  of  fire,  with  comments  on  tool-making  and  hunting.  In  S.  L.  Washburn  (Ed.), 
Social  life  of  early  man.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

Oblate  Census. 

1911.  Residence  habituelle  des  sauvages  de  Fort  Rae,  avec  leurs  families.  Holograph  list,  St.  Michael’s 
Mission,  Fort  Rae,  N.W.T.,  Canada. 

Odum,  Eugene  P. 

1959.  Fundamentals  of  ecology.  (2d  ed.)  Philadelphia,  London:  Saunders. 

Osgood,  Cornelius  B. 

1932.  The  ethnography  of  the  Great  Bear  Lake  Indians.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  70: 
3«-97- 


References  381 

1936a.  Contributions  to  the  ethnography  of  the  Kutchin.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  14. 
New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

1936b.  The  distribution  of  the  northern  Athapaskan  Indians.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology, 
no.  7.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

1 937-  The  enthography  of  the  Tanaina.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  16.  New  Haven: 
Yale  University  Press. 

1940.  Ingalik  material  culture.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  22.  New  Haven:  Yale 
University  Press. 

1958.  Ingalik  social  culture.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  53.  New  Haven:  Yale 
University  Press. 

1 959.  Ingalik  mental  culture.  Yale  University  Publications  in  Anthropology,  no.  56.  New  Haven:  Yale 
University  Press. 

Outram,  D.  N. 

1956.  Amount  of  herring  spawn  deposited  in  British  Columbia  coastal  waters  in  1956.  Fisheries  Research  Board  of 
Canada:  Pacific  Biological  Station,  Nanaimo,  B.C.,  Circular  no.  42. 

1957.  Extent  of  herring  spawn  in  British  Columbia  in  1957.  Fisheries  Research  Board  of  Canada:  Pacific 
Biological  Station,  Nanaimo,  B.C.,  Circular  no.  46. 

1 958.  The  1958  herring  spawn  deposition  in  British  Columbia  coastal  waters.  Fisheries  Research  Board  of  Canada : 
Pacific  Biological  Station,  Nanaimo,  B.C.,  Circular  no.  50. 

Owen,  Roger  C. 

1965.  The  patrilocal  band:  a linguistically  and  culturally  hybrid  social  unit.  American  Anthropologist, 
(n.s.),  67:  675-90. 

Palmatary,  Helen  Constance. 

1960.  The  archaeology  of  the  Lower  Tapajos  Valley,  Brazil.  Transactions  of  the  American  Philosophical 
Society  (n.s.),  50(3). 

1965.  The  river  of  the  Amazons.  New  York:  Carlton  Press. 

Pehrson,  Robert  N. 

1957.  The  bilateral  network  of  social  relations  in  Konkama  Lapp  District.  International  Journal  of  American 
Linguistics,  23(1),  pt.  2. 

Petitot,  Emile. 

1876.  Monographic  des  Dene-Dindjie.  Paris:  E.  Leroux. 

1887.  En  route  pour  la  Mer  Glaciate.  (3d  ed.)  Paris:  Letouzey  et  Ane. 

1891.  Autour  du  grand  lac  des  esclaves.  Paris:  Albert  Savine. 

Piddington,  Ralph,  and  Marjorie  Piddington. 

1932.  Report  on  fieldwork  in  northwestern  Australia.  Oceania,  2:  342-58. 

Piddocke,  Stuart. 

1965.  The  potlatch  system  of  the  southern  Kwakiutl:  a new  perspective.  Southwestern  Journal  of 
Anthropology,  2 1 : 244-64. 

Pike,  Gordon  C.,  and  B.  E.  Maxwell. 

1958.  The  abundance  and  distribution  of  the  northern  sea  lion  (Eumetopias  jubata)  on  the  coast  of  British 
Columbia.  Journal  of  the  Fisheries  Research  Board  of  Canada,  15:  5-1 7. 

Pilling,  Arnold  R. 

1958.  Law  and  feud  in  an  aboriginal  society  of  North  Australia.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University 
of  California,  Berkeley. 

1961.  Micro-evolution  among  the  Tiwi  of  north  Australia.  Proceedings  of  the  10th  Pacific  Science 
Congress  (Honolulu).  Abstracts  of  Symposium  Papers,  87. 

Plomley,  N.  J.  B.  (Ed.). 

1966.  Friendly  mission;  the  Tasmanian  journals  and  papers  of  George  Augustus  Robinson,  1829-1834.  Hobart: 
Tasmanian  Historical  Research  Association. 

Polunin,  Ivan. 

!953.  The  medical  natural  history  of  Malayan  aborigines  and  their  medical  investigation.  Medical 
Journal  of  Malaya,  8 : 55- 1 74. 


38a  References 

Pospisil,  Leopold. 

1964.  Law  and  societal  structure  among  the  Nunamiut  Eskimo.  In  Ward  H.  Goodenough  (Ed)., 
Explorations  in  cultural  anthropology : essays  in  honor  of  George  Peter  Murdock.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Price,  D.  L.,  G.  V.  Mann,  O.  A.  Roels,  and  J.  M.  Merrill. 

1963.  Parasitism  in  Congo  Pygmies.  American  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene,  12:  383-87. 
Putnam,  Patrick. 

1948.  The  Pygmies  of  the  Ituri  forest.  In  Carleton  S.  Coon  (Ed.),  A reader  in  general  anthropology.  New 
York:  Henry  Holt. 

Radcliffe-Brown,  A.  R. 

1930.  Former  numbers  and  distribution  of  the  Australian  aborigines.  Official  Yearbook  of  the  Commonwealth 
of  Australia,  23:  671-96. 

1 930- 1 93 1 , Social  organization  of  Australian  tribes.  Oceania  1 : 34-63,  206-246,  322-341,  426-456. 

1931.  Social  organization  of  Australian  tribes.  Oceania  Monographs,  1 . 

1933.  The  Andaman  Islanders.  (2d  ed.)  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

1951.  Murngin  social  organization.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  53:  37-55. 

1952.  Patrilineal  and  matrilineal  succession.  In  A.  R.  Radcliffe-Brown,  Structure  and  function  in  primitive 
society.  Glencoe,  111.:  The  Free  Press.  (First  published  1935  in  The  Iowa  Law  Review,  20(2].) 

1956.  On  Australian  local  organization.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  58:  363-67. 

Rappaport,  Roy  A. 

1966.  Ritual  in  the  ecology  of  a New  Guinea  people.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  Columbia  University. 
Rasmussen,  Knud. 

1929.  Intellectual  culture  of  the  Hudson  Bay  Eskimo,  I:  intellectual  culture  of  the  Iglulik  Eskimos. 
Report  of  the  fifth  Thule  expedition,  1921-24,  7(1).  Copenhagen:  Gyldendalske  Boghandel. 

1931.  The  Netsilik  Eskimos:  social  life  and  spiritual  culture.  Report  of  the  fifth  Thule  expedition,  1921 -192  4, 
8(1,  2).  Copenhagen.  Gyldendalske  Boghandel. 

1932.  Intellectual  culture  of  the  Copper  Eskimos.  Report  of  the  fifth  Thule  expedition,  1921-1924,  9. 
Copenhagen:  Gyldendalske  Boghandel. 

Ray,  Verne. 

1938.  Lower  Chinook  ethnographic  notes.  University  of  Washington  Publications  in  Anthropology,  7(2): 

29_i65- 

Reay,  Marie. 

1962.  Subsections  at  Borroloola.  Oceania,  33:  90-1 15. 

Reed,  William  Allen. 

1904.  Negritos  of  Z ambales . Department  of  the  Interior,  Ethnological  Survey  Publications  2(1).  Manila: 
Bureau  of  Printing. 

Reid,  Russell  M. 

1967.  Marriage  systems  and  algebraic  group  theory.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  69:  171-78. 

Reim,  Helmut. 

1964.  Ein  australischer  Robinson.  Leipzig:  Brockhaus  Verlag. 

Reynolds,  Vernon. 

1963.  An  outline  of  the  behavior  and  social  organization  of  forest-living  chimpanzees.  Folia  Primatologica 
(Basel  and  New  York),  1(2):  95-102. 

Reynolds,  Vernon,  and  Frances  Reynolds. 

1965.  Chimpanzees  of  the  Budongo  forest.  In  I.  DeVore  (Ed.),  Primate  behavior.  New  York:  Holt, 
Rinehart  and  Winston. 

Richards,  Audrey  I. 

1939.  Land,  labour  and  diet  in  Northern  Rhodesia.  London:  Oxford  University  Press. 

1 950.  Some  types  of  family  structure  amongst  the  central  Bantu.  In  A.  R.  Radcliffe-Brown  and  Daryll 
Forde  (Eds.),  African  systems  of  kinship  and  marriage.  London:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Richardson,  John. 

1851 . Arctic  searching  expedition:  a journal  of  a boat  voyage  through  Rupert' s Land  and  the  Arctic  Sea  in  search  of  the 


References  383 

discovery  ships  under  command  of  Sir  John  Franklin.  London:  Longmans,  Brown,  Green,  and  Longmans. 
Rivera,  Trinit  a. 

1949.  Diet  of  a food-gathering  people,  with  chemical  analysis  of  salmon  and  saskatoons.  In  Marian 
Smith  (Ed.),  Indians  of  the  urban  northwest.  Columbia  University  Contributions  to  Anthropology,  36. 
Rodriques,  Arion  d. 

1958.  Classification  of  Tupi-Guarani.  International  Journal  of  American  Linguistics  44:  231-34. 

Rogers,  Edward  S. 

1962.  The  Round  Lake  Ojibwa.  Royal  Ontario  Museum,  Division  of  Art  and  Archaeology,  Occasional 
Paper  no.  5. 

1963a.  Changing  settlement  patterns  of  the  Cree-Ojibwa  of  northern  Ontario.  Southwestern  Journal  of 
Anthropology,'  1 9 : 64-88. 

1963b.  The  hunting  group-hunting  territory  complex  among  the  Mistassini  Indians.  Bulletin  of  the  National 
Museum  of  Canada,  no.  195. 

1965.  Leadership  among  the  Indians  of  eastern  sub-arctic  Canada.  Anthropologica  (n.s.),  7:  263-84. 
Rogers,  Edward  S.,  and  Jean  Rogers. 

i960.  The  individual  in  Mistassini  society  from  birth  to  death.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada, 
no.  190. 

Roney,  James  G.,  Jr. 

1959.  Paleopathology  of  a California  archaeological  site.  Bulletin  of  the  History  of  Medicine,  33:  97-109. 
Rose,  Frederick  G.  G. 

1960a.  The  Australian  aboriginal  family:  some  theoretical  considerations.  Forschen  and  Wirken  (Berlin), 
3--  U5-37- 

1 960b.  Classification  of  kin,  age  structure  and  marriage  amongst  the  Groote  Eylandt  aborigines : a study  in  method  and 
a theory  of  Australian  kinship.  Berlin:  Akademie-Verlag.  (London:  Pergamon). 

1963.  On  the  structure  of  the  Australian  family.  VIe  Congrls  International  des  Sciences  Anthropologiques  et 
Ethnologiques : Paris — 30  Juillet — 6 Aoilt,  ig6o,  2(1):  247-51. 

1965a.  Unilateral  cross-cousin  marriage.  Man,  65:  24-25. 

1965b.  The  winds  of  change  in  central  Australia:  the  aborigines  at  Angas  Downs,  ig6s.  Berlin:  Akademie- 
Verlag. 

Rostlund,  Erhard. 

1952.  Freshwater  fish  and  fishing  in  native  North  America.  University  of  California  Publications  in  Geography, 
no.  9.  (Berkeley). 

Roth,  H.  Ling. 

1890.  The  aborigines  of  Tasmania.  London:  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Trtibner. 

1896.  The  natives  of  Sarawak  and  British  North  Borneo,  based  chiefly  on  the  MSS.  of  the  late  Hugh  Brooke  Low, 
Sarawak  government  service.  (2  vols.)  London:  Truslove  and  Hanson. 

Roth,  Walter  E. 

1897.  Ethnological  studies  among  the  north-west  central  Queensland  aborigines.  Brisbane:  E.  Gregory. 

1901.  Food:  its  search,  capture  and  preparation.  North  Queensland  Bulletin  of  Ethnography,  no.  3. 

Rounsefell,  George  A.,  and  George  B.  Kelez. 

1938.  The  salmon  and  salmon  fisheries  of  Swiftsure  Bank,  Puget  Sound,  and  the  Fraser  River.  U.S.  Department  of 
Commerce,  Bureau  of  Fisheries,  Bulletin  no.  27. 

Rouse,  Irving,  and  Jose  M.  Cruxent. 

1963a.  Some  recent  radiocarbon  dates  for  western  Venezuela.  American  Antiquity,  28(4):  537-40. 

1963b.  Venezuelan  archaeology.  Yale  Caribbean  Series,  no.  6.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

Rowe,  John  Howland. 

1952.  Introduction.  In  Curt  Nimuendaju,  The  Tapajo.  Kroeber  Anthropological  Society  Papers,  6:  1-25. 
Roy,  Sarat  Chandra. 

1925.  The  Birhors : a little-known  jungle  tribe  of  Chota  Nagpur.  Ranchi:  Loudon,  Probsthain. 

Royal  Anthropological  Institute. 

1951.  Notes  and  queries  in  anthropology.  (6th  ed.)  London:  Routledge  and  Kegan  Paul. 


384  References 

Russell,  Frank. 

1898.  Explorations  in  the  far  north:  being  the  report  of  an  expedition  under  the  auspices  of  the  University  of  Iowa, 
1892-94.  Iowa  City:  University  of  Iowa  Press. 

Sackett,  J.  R. 

1965.  Archaeological  interpretation  in  the  Upper  Paleolithic.  Paper  presented  at  American  Anthropological 
Association  annual  meetings,  Denver. 

1966.  Quantitative  analysis  of  Upper  Palaeolithic  stone  tools.  In  J.  D.  Clark  and  F.  C.  Howell  (Eds.), 
Recent  studies  in  paleoanthropology.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  68(2),  pt.  2:  356-94. 

Sade,  Donald  S. 

1965.  Some  aspects  of  parent-offspring  and  sibling  relations  in  a group  of  rhesus  monkeys,  with  a dis- 
cussion of  grooming.  American  Journal  of  Physical  Anthropology  (n.s.),  23(1) : 1— 1 7. 

1966.  Ontogeny  of  social  relations  in  a group  of  free  ranging  Rhesus  monkeys  ( Macaca  mulatto  Zimmerman). 
Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  California,  Berkeley. 

Sahlins,  Marshall  D. 

1958.  Social  stratification  in  Polynesia.  American  Ethnological  Society  Monographs,  no.  29.  Seattle: 
University  of  Washington  Press. 

i960.  Political  power  and  the  economy  in  primitive  society.  In  Gertrude  E.  Dole  and  Robert  L.  Carneiro 
(Eds.),  Essays  in  the  science  of  culture  in  honor  of  Leslie  A.  White.  New  York:  Thomas  Y.  Crowell. 

1965.  On  the  ideology  and  composition  of  descent  groups.  Man,  65:  105-107. 

1966.  On  the  Delphic  writings  of  Claude  L^vi-Strauss.  Scientific  American,  214(6):  131-36. 

Sahlins,  Marshall  D.,  and  Elman  R.  Service  (Eds.). 

i960.  Evolution  and  culture.  Ann  Arbor:  University  of  Michigan  Press. 

Samuels,  Robert. 

1965.  Parasitological  study  of  long-dried  fecal  samples.  In  H.  D.  Osborne  (comp.),  Contributions  of  the 
Weatherill  Mesa  archaeological  project.  Memoirs  of  the  Society  of  American  Archaeology,  no.  19. 

Sauer,  Carl  O. 

1950.  Geography  of  South  America.  InJ.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians,  vol.  6: 
Physical  anthropology,  linguistics  and  cultural  geography  of  South  American  Indians.  Bureau  of  American 
Ethnology,  Bulletin  no.  143(6):  319-44. 

1952.  Agricultural  origins  and  dispersals.  New  York:  American  Geographical  Society. 

Sawyer,  Jack,  and  Robert  A.  Levine. 

1966.  Cultural  dimension:  a factor  analysis  of  the  World  Ethnographic  Sample.  American  Anthropologist 
(n.s.),  68:  708-731 . 

Schaller,  George  B. 

1963.  The  mountain  gorilla:  ecology  and  behavior.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

1965.  The  behavior  of  the  mountain  gorilla.  In  I.  DeVore  (Ed.),  Primate  behavior.  New  York:  Holt, 
Rinehart  and  Winston. 

Schapera,  Isaac. 

1926.  A preliminary  consideration  of  the  relationship  between  the  Hottentots  and  Bushmen.  South 
African  Journal  of  Science,  23 : 833-36. 

1930.  The  Khoisan  peoples  of  South  Africa:  Bushmen  and  Hottentots.  London:  Routledge  and  Kegan  Paul. 

SCHEBESTA,  PAUL. 

1928.  Orang-Utan:  Bei  den  Urwaldmenschen  Malayas  und  Samatras.  Leipzig:  F.  A.  Brockhaus. 

1929.  Among  the  forest  dwarfs  of  Malaya.  Trans,  by  A.  Chambers.  London:  Hutchinson. 

1931.  Erste  Mitteilungen  iiber  die  Ergebnisse  meiner  Forschungsreise  bei  den  Pygmaen  in  Belgisch- 
Kongo.  Anthropos,  26:  1-27. 

1938-50.  Die  Bambute-Pygmaen  vom  Ituri.  Memoires  de  I’Institut  Royal  Colonial  Beige,  Section  des  Sciences 
Morales  et  Politiques,  1,  2,  4. 

1952.  Die  Negrito  Asiens,  1 : Geschichte,  Geographic.  Umwelt,  Demographie,  und  Anthropologie  der 
Negrito.  Studia  Instituti  Anthropos,  no.  6.  Wien-Modling:  St.  Gabriel  Verlag. 

1954.  Die  Negrito  Asiens,  2 : Ethnographic  der  Negrito,  part  1 : Wirtschaft  und  Soziologie.  Studia  Instituti 
Anthropos,  no.  12.  Wien-Mddling : St.  Gabriel  Verlag. 


References  385 

1957.  Die  Negrito  Asiens,  2:  Ethnographic  der  Negrito,  part  2:  Religion  and  Mythologie.  Studia  Instituti 
Anthropos,  no.  13.  Wien-Modling:  St.  Gabriel  Verlag. 

Schmidt,  Max. 

1905.  Indianerstudien  in  Zentralbrasilien.  Berlin:  Dietrich  Reimer. 

1942.  Resultados  de  mi  Tercera  Expedicion  a los  Guatos.  Revista  de  la  Sociedad  Cientifica  del  Paraguay. 
5(6):  4'-75- 
Schneider,  D.  M. 

1965.  Some  muddles  in  the  models:  or,  how  the  system  really  works.  In  The  relevance  of  models  for  social 
anthropology.  Association  of  Social  Anthropologists  Monographs,  1 : 25-85. 

Schrenck,  Leopold  von. 

1881-91.  D\e  Volker  des  Amur-Landes,  Reisen  und  Forschungen  in  Amur-Lande  in  den  Jahren  1854-56.  St. 
Petersburg. 

Seligmann,  Charles  G.,  and  Brenda  Z.  Seligmann. 

1 9 1 1 . The  Veddas.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

* 

Seltzer,  Leon  E.  (Ed.). 

1952.  The  Columbia  Lippincott  gazetteer  of  the  world.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press. 

Semenov,  S.  A. 

1964.  Prehistoric  technology.  London:  Barnes  and  Noble. 

Semon,  Richard. 

1 899.  In  the  Australian  bush  and  on  the  coast  of  the  Coral  Sea  ; being  the  experiences  and  observations  of  a naturalist 
in  Australia,  New  Guinea,  and  the  Moluccas.  London,  New  York:  Macmillan 
Sen,  Bijay  K..,  and  Jyoti  Sen. 

1955.  Notes  on  the  Birhors.  Man  in  India,  35(3):  169-76. 

Service,  Elman  R. 

i960.  Sociocentric  relationship  terms  and  the  Australian  class  system.  In  Gertrude  E.  Dole  and  Robert  L. 
Carneiro  (Eds.),  Essays  in  the  science  of  culture  in  honor  of  Leslie  A.  White.  New  York:  Thomas  Y.  Crowell. 

1962.  Primitive  social  organization : an  evolutionary  perspective.  New  York:  Random  House. 

1966.  The  hunters.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.  J. : Prentice-Hall. 

Shack,  William  A. 

1964.  Notes  on  occupational  castes  among  the  Gurage.  Man,  64:  50-54. 

1966.  The  Gurage:  a people  of  the  Ensete  culture.  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Shapiro,  Harry  L. 

1957.  Impact  of  culture  on  genetic  mechanisms.  In  The  nature  and  transmission  of  the  genetic  and  cultural 
characteristics  of  human  Imputations.  New  York:  Milbank  Memorial  Fund. 

Sharp,  Richard  Lauriston. 

1934.  The  social  organization  of  the  Yir-Yiront  tribes,  Cape  York  Peninsula,  pt.  2:  ritual  life  and 
economics.  Oceania,  5(1):  19-42. 

1940.  An  Australian  aboriginal  population.  Human  Biology,  12:  481-507. 

1952.  Steel  axes  for  Stone  Age  Australians.  In  Edward  Spicer  (Ed.),  Human  problems  in  technological  change. 
New  York:  Russell  Sage  Foundation. 

Sheils,  Helen. 

1963.  Australian  aboriginal  studies.  Melbourne:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Shimkin,  Df.mitri  B. 

1940.  A sketch  of  the  Ket,  or  Yenisei  “Ostyak.”  Ethnos,  4:  147-76. 

Shirokogorov,  S.  M. 

1935.  Psychomental  complex  of  the  Tungus.  London:  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner. 

SlLBERBAUER,  G.  B. 

1 965.  Report  to  the  Government  of  Bechuanaland  on  the  Bushman  survey.  Gaberones,  Bechuanaland : Government 
of  Bechuanaland. 

Simmons,  Leo  W. 

1945.  The  role  of  the  aged  in  primitive  society.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 


386  References 

Simpson,  George. 

1938.  Journal  of  occurrences  in  the  Athabasca  Department , 1820  and  1821.  vol.  1.  Ed.  by  E.  E.  Rich.  Toronto: 
Publications  of  the  Champlain  Society,  no.  1,  Hudson’s  Bay  Company  Series. 

Simpson,  George  Gaylord. 

1 956.  Evolution  and  geography : an  essay  on  historical  biogeography , with  special  reference  to  mammals.  Condon 
Lectures,  December,  1953.  Eugene:  Oregon  State  System  of  Higher  Education. 

1961.  Principles  of  animal  taxonomy.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press. 

1966.  The  biological  nature  of  man.  Science,  152(3721):  472-78. 

Skeat,  Walter  W.,  and  C.  O.  Blagden. 

1906.  Pagan  races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  London:  Macmillan. 

Slater,  Miriam  K. 

1959.  Ecological  factors  in  the  origin  of  incest.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  61:  1042-59. 

Slobodin,  Richard. 

1962.  Band  organization  of  the  Peel  River  Kutchin.  Bulletin  of  the  National  Museum  of  Canada,  no.  179. 
Soli.as,  William  J. 

1911.  Ancient  hunters  and  their  modern  representatives.  London:  Macmillan. 
deSonneville-Bordes,  Denise,  and  J.  Perrot. 

1 954-56.  Lexique  typologique  du  Paleolithique  superieur.  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Prehistorique  Franfaise , 51  : 
327-55;  52;  76-79;  53:  408-412. 

Specht,  R.  L. 

1958.  An  introduction  to  the  ethnobotany  of  Arnhem  Land.  Records  of  the  American-Australian  Scientific 
Expedition  to  Arnhem  Land,  3:  479-503. 

Speck,  Frank  C. 

1915.  The  family  hunting  band  as  the  basis  of  the  Algonkian  social  organization.  American  Anthropologist 
(n.s.)  17(2):  289-305. 

1931.  Montagnais-Naskapi  bands  and  early  Eskimo  distribution  in  the  Labrador  Peninsula.  American 
Anthropologist  (n.s.),  33:  557-600. 

Speck,  Frank  G.,  and  Loren  C.  Eiseley. 

1939.  The  significance  of  hunting  territory  systems  of  the  Algonkian  in  social  theory.  American  Anthro- 
pologist (n.s.),  41 : 269-80. 

Spencer,  Baldwin. 

1914.  Native  tribes  of  the  Northern  Territory  of  Australia.  London:  Macmillan. 

Spencer,  Baldwin,  and  F.  J.  Gillen. 

1899.  The  native  tribes  of  central  Australia.  London:  Macmillan. 

1904.  The  northern  tribes  of  central  Australia.  London:  Macmillan. 

1927.  The  Arunla:  a study  of  a Stone-Age  people.  London:  Macmillan. 

Spencer,  Robert  F. 

1 959.  The  north  Alaskan  Eskimo : a study  in  ecology  and  society.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  no.  1 7 1 . 
1965.  The  Eskimo  of  northern  Alaska.  In  R.  F.  Spencer  et  al.  (Eds.),  The  native  Americans : prehistory  and 
ethnology  of  the  North  American  Indians.  New  York,  London:  Harper  and  Row. 

Spuhler,  J.  N. 

1959.  Somatic  paths  to  culture.  In  J.  N.  Spuhler  (Ed.),  The  evolution  of  man’s  capacity  for  culture.  Detroit: 
Wayne  State  University  Press. 

Stanner,  W.  E.  H. 

1932.  The  Daly  River  tribes,  a report  of  field  work  in  north  Australia.  Oceania,  3:  377-405. 

1936.  Murinbata  kinship  and  totemism.  Oceania,  7:  186-216. 

1965.  Aboriginal  territorial  organization:  estate,  range,  domain  and  regime.  Oceania,  36(1):  1-26. 
Stefansson,  Vilhjalmur. 

1914.  The  Stefansson- Anderson  Arctic  expedition  of  the  American  Museum:  preliminary  ethnological  report.  Anthro- 
pological Papers  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  no.  24. 

Sternberg,  Hilgard  O’Reilly. 

1964.  Land  and  man  in  the  tropics.  Proceedings  of  the  Academy  of  Political  Science,  27(4) : 319-29. 


References  387 


Steward,  Julian  H. 

1936.  The  economic  and  social  basis  of  primitive  bands.  In  R.  H.  Lowie  (Ed.),  Essays  in  anthropology 
presented  to  A.  L.  Kroeber.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 

1937.  Linguistic  distributions  and  political  groups  of  the  Great  Basin  Shoshoneans.  American  Anthropologist 
(n.s.),  39:  625-34. 

1938.  Basin-plateau  aboriginal  socio-political  groups.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  no.  120. 

1941.  Determinism  in  primitive  society?  Scientific  Monthly,  53:  491-501. 

1943.  Northern  and  Gosiute  Shoshoni.  Culture  Element  Distributions  23.  Anthropological  Records 
(Berkeley),  8:  263-392. 

1946.  The  marginal  tribes.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians,  vol.  1 '.The  marginal 
tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  143(1). 

1948a.  Tribes  of  the  Montana.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians,  vol.  %\The 
tropical  forest  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  143(3) : 5°7“533- 

1948b.  Culture  areas  of  the  tropical  forest.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  South  American  Indians, 
vol.  3 -.The1, tropical  forest  tribes.  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  Bulletin  143(3) : 883-99. 

1953.  Aboriginal  and  historic  groups  of  the  Ute  Indians  of  Utah:  an  analysis.  Paper  presented  before  the 
Indian  Claims  Commission  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Justice.  (Mimeo.) 

1955.  Theory  of  culture  change : the  methodology  of  multilinear  evolution.  Urbana:  University  of  Illinois  Press. 
i960.  Carrier  acculturation:  the  direct  historical  approach.  In  Stanley  Diamond  (Ed.),  Culture  in  history, 
essays  in  honor  of  Paul  Radin.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press. 

1965.  Some  problems  raised  by  Roger  C.  Owen’s  “The  patrilocal  band.”  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.), 
67:  732-33- 

1966.  Toward  understanding  cultural  evolution.  (Review  of  Robert  McC.  Adam’s  The  evolution  of  urban 
society.)  Science,  153(3737):  729-30. 

1967.  Comments  on  Chang’s  “Major  aspects  of  the  interrelationship  of  archaeology  and  ethnology.” 
Current  Anthropology,  8(3):  239-40. 

In  press  a.  Cultural  ecology.  In  International  Encyclopedia  of  the  Social  Sciences. 

In  press  b.  Perspectives  of  modernization.  In  J.  H.  Steward  (Ed.),  Contemporary  change  in  traditional  societies, 
I.  Urbana:  University  of  Illinois  Press. 

Steward,  Julian  H.,  and  Ermine  Wheeler-Vogelin. 

1953.  Aboriginal  and  historic  groups  of  northern  Paiute  Indians  of  Oregon,  Nevada,  and  California.  Paper  presented 
before  the  Indian  Claims  Commission  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Justice. 

Stow,  George  W. 

1905.  The  native  races  of  South  Africa;  a history  of  the  intrusion  of  the  Hottentots  and  Bantu  into  the  hunting  grounds 
of  the  Bushmen,  the  aborigines  of  the  country.  London : Swan  Sonnenschein. 

Strehlow,  Theodor  G.  H. 

1947.  Aranda  traditions.  Melbourne:  Melbourne  University  Press. 

1965.  Culture,  social  structure,  and  environment  in  aboriginal  Australia.  In  R.  M.  Berndt  and  C.  H. 
Berndt  (Eds.),  Aboriginal  man  in  Australia:  essays  in  honour  of  Emeritus  Professor  A.  P.  Elkin.  Sydney,  London, 
Melbourne : Angus  and  Robertson. 

Strong,  William  D. 

1929a.  Aboriginal  society  in  Southern  California:  University  of  California  Publications  in  American  Archae- 
ology and  Ethnology  (Berkeley)  no.  26. 

1929b.  Cross-cousin  marriage  and  the  culture  of  the  northeastern  Algonkian.  American  Anthropologist 
(n.s.),  31:  277-88. 

Struever,  Stuart. 

1966.  Middle  Woodland  culture  history  in  the  Great  Lakes  riverine  area.  American  Antiquity,  31 : 211-23. 
Struhsaker,  Thomas  T. 

1967.  Auditory  communication  among  vervet  monkeys  (Cercopithecus  aethiops).  In  S.  A,  Altmann 
(Ed.),  Social  communication  among  primates.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Sue,  Hiroko. 

1964.  Hare  Indians  and  their  world.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  Bryn  Mawr  College. 


388  References 

Suttles,  Wayne. 

i960.  Affinal  ties,  subsistence,  and  prestige  among  the  Coast  Salish.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  62: 
296-305. 

1962.  Variation  in  habitat  and  culture  in  the  northwest  coast.  Akten  des  34  Internationalen  Amerikanistenkon- 
gresses,  Wein,  i960:  522-37. 

Swan,  James  G. 

1870.  The  Indians  of  Cape  Flattery.  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge,  no.  16. 

Sweeney,  G. 

1947.  Food  supplies  of  a desert  tribe.  Oceania,  17:  289-99. 

Tax,  Sol. 

1937.  Some  problems  of  social  organization.  In  Fred  Eggan  (Ed.),  Social  anthropology  of  North  American 
tribes.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Tax,  Sol  (Ed.). 

!953.  An  appraisal  of  anthropology  today.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Taylor,  Clara  M.,  and  Orrea  F.  Pye. 

1966.  Foundations  of  nutrition.  (6th  ed.)  New  York:  Macmillan. 

Taylor,  Garth  J. 

1965.  Social  organization  of  the  eighteenth  century  Labrador  Eskimo.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation, 
University  of  Toronto. 

Taylor,  Griffith. 

1943.  Australia.  (2d  ed.,  rev.)  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton. 

Taylor,  Herbert  C. 

1963.  Aboriginal  populations  of  the  lower  northwest  coast.  Pacific  Northwest  Quarterly,  54:  158-65. 
Teicher,  Morton  I. 

i960.  Windigo  psychosis.  Proceedings,  i960  Annual  Spring  Meeting,  American  Philosophical  Society. 
Thalbitzer,  William  (Ed.). 

1914.  The  Ammassalik  Eskimo.  Meddelelser  om  Grenland  (Copenhagen),  40. 

Thomas,  Elizabeth  Marshall. 

1959.  The  harmless  people.  New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf. 

Thomas,  Northcote  W. 

1 906.  Kinship  organization  and  group  marriage  in  Australia.  Cambridge : Cambridge  University  Press. 

Thomas,  William. 

1878.  Succinct  sketch  of  the  aboriginal  language.  In  R.  Brough  Smyth  (Ed.),  The  aborigines  of  Victoria, 
vol.  2.  Melbourne:  J.  Ferres. 

Thompson,  Raymond  H. 

1 956.  The  subjective  element  in  archaeological  inference.  Southwestern  Journal  of  Anthropology,  1 2 : 327-32. 
1958.  Modern  Yucatecan  May  pottery  making.  Memoirs  of  the  Society  for  American  Archaeology,  15.  (Also: 
American  Antiquity,  23[4],  pt.  2.) 

Thomson,  Donald  F. 

1933.  The  hero  cult,  initiation  and  totemism  on  Cape  York.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  63 : 543-538. 

1934a.  Notes  on  a hero  cult  from  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  North  Queensland.  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  64:  217-36. 

1934b.  The  dugong  hunters  of  Cape  York.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  64:  237-63. 

1939.  The  seasonal  factor  in  human  culture.  Proceedings  of  the  Prehistoric  Society  (n.s.),  5:  209-221. 
1948-49.  Arnhem  Land:  explorations  among  an  unknown  people.  Geographical  Journal,  112:  146-64; 

1 13 : ‘-8;  114;  53-67- 

1949.  Economic  structure  and  the  ceremonial  exchange  cycle  in  Arnhem  Land.  Melbourne:  Macmillan. 

1 964.  Some  wood  and  stone  implements  of  the  Bindibu  tribe  of  central  West  Australia.  Proceedings  of  the 
Prehistoric  Society  (n.s.),  30:  400-422. 


References  389 


Tindale,  Norman  B. 

1925.  Natives  of  Groote  Eylandt  and  of  the  west  coast  of  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.  Records  of  the  South 
Australia  Museum,  3(1-2):  61-134. 

1940.  Results  of  the  Harvard-Adelaide  Universities  anthropological  expedition,  1938-1939:  distribution 
of  Australian  aboriginal  tribes : a field  survey.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  South  Australia,  64 : 1 40-23 1 . 
'953-  Tribal  and  intertribal  marriage  among  the  Australian  aborigines.  Human  Biology,  25:  169-90. 

1957.  Culture  succession  in  south  eastern  Australia  from  late  Pleistocene  to  the  present.  Records  of  the  South 
Australian  Museum,  13:  1-49. 

1962a.  Geographical  knowledge  of  the  Kaiadilt  people  of  Bentinck  Island,  Queensland.  Records  of  the 
South  Australian  Museum,  14:  259-96. 

1962b.  Some  population  changes  among  the  Kaiadilt  people  of  Bentinck  Island,  Queensland.  Records  of 
the  South  Australian  Museum,  1 4 : 297-336. 

Tindale,  Norman  B.,  and  J.  B.  Birdsell. 

1941.  Results  of  the  Harvard-Adelaide  Universities  anthropological  expedition,  1938-1939:  Tasmanoid 
tribes  in  north  Queensland.  Records  of  the  South  Australian  Museum,  7:  1-9. 

Tindale,  Norman  B.,  and  H.  V.  V.  Noone. 

1941.  Results  of  the  Harvard-Adelaide  Universities  anthropological  expedition,  1938-1939:  analysis  of 
an  Australian  aboriginal’s  hoard  of  knapped  flint.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  South  Australia,  65: 
116-22. 

Tobias,  P.  V. 

1956.  On  the  survival  of  the  Bushmen,  with  an  estimate  of  the  problem  facing  anthropologists.  Africa,  26: 
174-86. 

1964.  Bushman  hunter-gatherers:  a study  in  human  ecology.  In  D.  H.  S.  Davis  (Ed.),  Ecological  studies  in 
southern  Africa.  The  Hague:  W.  Junk. 

Tokarev,  S.  A. 

1961.  Zur  Bedeutung  der  Frauendarstellungen  im  Palaolithikum.  Veroffentlichungen  des  Museums  fur 
Volkerkunde  (Leipzig),  1 1 : 682-92. 

Treide,  Dietrich. 

1965.  Die  Organisierung  des  indianischen  Lachsfangs  in  westlichen  Nordamerika.  Veroffentlichungen  des 
Museums  fur  Volkerkunde  (Leipzig),  14. 

Tretyakov,  P.  N. 

1 934.  K Istorii  doklassovogo  obsh  ’chestva  verkhnego  Povolzhya  (On  the  history  of  pre-class  society  in  the 
area  of  the  Upper  Volga).  In  Iz  Istorii  Rodovogo  Obsh’  chestva  na  Territorii  SSSR,  Gosudarstavannaia  Akademiia 
Istorii  Material'noi  Kul’tury  (Moscow),  106:  97-180. 

Trewartha,  Glenn  T. 

1954.  An  introduction  to  climate.  (3d  ed.)  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Turnbull,  Colin  M. 

1961.  The  forest  people : a study  of  the  Pygmies  of  the  Congo.  New  York : Simon  & Schuster. 

1965a.  The  Mbuti  Pygmies:  an  ethnographic  survey.  Anthropological  Papers  of  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History,  50(3):  139-282. 

1965b.  Wayward  servants:  the  two  worlds  of  the  African  Pygmies.  Garden  City:  Natural  History  Press. 

1965c.  The  Mbuti  Pygmies  of  the  Congo.  In  James  L.  Gibbs  (Ed.),  Peoples  of  Africa.  New  York,  London : 
Holt,  Rinehart,  and  Winston. 

Turner,  Terence  S. 

1965.  Social  structure  and  political  organization  among  the  northern  Cayapo.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation, 
Harvard  University. 

Underhill,  Ruth. 

1945.  Indians  of  the  Pacific  Northwest.  Sherman  Pamphlets  on  Indian  Life  and  Customs,  no.  5.  Lawrence, 
Kansas:  Educational  Division,  U.S.  Office  of  Indian  Affairs. 

United  Nations.  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs,  Statistical  Office. 

1958.  Demographic  yearbook.  (10th  ed.)  New  York:  Author. 


390  References 

Vallois,  Henri  V. 

1961.  The  social  life  of  early  man:  the  evidence  of  skeletons.  In  S.  L.  Washburn  (Ed.),  Social  life  of  early 
man.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

Van  de  Velde,  Frans. 

1956.  Les  regies  du  partage  des  phoques  prispar  la  chasse  aux  aglus.  Anthropologica,  3:  5-14. 

Van  Stone,  James  W. 

1961.  The  economy  of  a frontier  community:  a preliminary  statement.  Canada,  Department  of  Northern  Affairs 
and  National  Resources,  Northern  Coordination  and  Research  Centre,  Report,  no.  4 (for  1961). 

1962.  Point  Hope:  an  Eskimo  village  in  transition.  American  Ethnological  Society  Monograph,  no.  35. 
Seattle:  University  of  Washington  Press. 

Vayda,  Andrew  P. 

1961a.  A re-examination  of  Northwest  Coast  economic  systems.  Transactions  of  the  New  York  Academy  of 
Sciences,  Series  2,  23:  618-24. 

1961b.  Expansion  and  warfare  among  swidden  agriculturalists.  American  Anthropologist  (n.s.),  63(2), 
pt.  1 : 346-58. 

Velder,  C.  M. 

1963.  A description  of  the  Mrabi  camp.  Journal  of  the  Siam  Society,  51  : 185-88. 

1964.  Review  of  H.  A.  Bernatzik’s  “Die  Geister  der  Gelben  Blatter.”  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologic,  89(1): 
10-23. 

Vellard,  J. 

!93g.  Une  civilisation  du  miel : les  Indiens  Guayakis  du  Paraguay.  (7th  ed.)  Paris:  Gallimard. 

Verhoeven,  L.  A.,  and  E.  B.  Davidoff. 

1962.  Marine  tagging  of  Fraser  River  sockeye  salmon.  International  Pacific  Salmon  Fisheries  Commission, 
Bulletin  (New  Westminster,  B.C.),  13. 

Vorkapich,  Myra. 

MS.  Ecology  as  a factor  in  Great  Basin  aboriginal  population  density. 

Wagley,  Charles,  and  E.  Galvao.  « 

1949.  The  Tenetehara  Indians  of  Brazil:  a culture  in  transition.  Columbia  University  Contributions  to 
Anthropology,  no.  35. 

Wagner,  Philip  L. 

i960.  The  human  use  of  the  earth.  Glencoe,  111.:  The  Free  Press. 

Warner,  William  Lloyd. 

1937.  A black  civilization : a study  of  an  Australian  tribe.  New  York:  Harper. 

Washburn,  Sherwood  L. 

1965.  An  ape’s  eye  view  of  evolution.  In  Paul  DeVore  (Ed.),  The  origin  of  man  (symposium  transcript). 
New  York:  Wenner-Gren  Foundation  for  Anthropological  Research. 

Washburn,  Sherwood  L.,  and  Virginia  Avis. 

1958.  Evolution  of  human  behavior.  In  Anne  Roe  and  G.  G.  Simpson  (Eds.),  Behavior  and  evolution. 
New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press. 

Washburn,  Sherwood  L.,  and  Irven  DeVore. 

1961a.  Social  behavior  of  baboons  and  early  man.  In  S.  L.  Washburn  (Ed.),  Social  life  of  early  man. 
Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing  Company. 

1961b.  The  social  life  of  baboons.  Scientific  American,  204(6):  62-71. 

Washburn,  Sherwood  L.,  Phyllis  C.  Jay,  and  Jane  B.  Lancaster. 

1965.  Field  studies  of  Old  World  monkeys  and  apes.  Science,  150(3703) : 1541-47. 

Watanabe,  Hitoshi. 

1964a.  The  Ainu:  a study  of  ecology  and  the  system  of  social  solidarity  between  man  and  nature  in 
relation  to  group  structure.  Journal  of  the  Faculty  of  Science  (Tokyo),  Section  5,  2(6). 

1964b.  Ecology  of  the  Ainu  and  problems  in  prehistory  in  Japan.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of 
Nippon,  72(740):  9-23.  (In  Japanese). 

1966.  Ecology  of  the  Jomon  people:  stability  of  habitation  and  its  biological  and  ethnohistorical  implica- 
tions. Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Nippon,  74(749) : 73-84.  (In  Japanese). 


References  39 1 

In  press.  Stability  of  habitation  and  food  surplus  among  the  Ainu.  Papers  of  the  VII  International  Congress  of 
Anthropological  and  Ethnological  Sciences,  Moscow,  1964. 

Watt,  Bernice  K.,  and  Annabel  L.  Merrill. 

1963.  Composition  of  foods:  raw,  processed,  prepared.  Agricultural  Handbook  no.  8.  U.S.  Department  of 
Agriculture,  Agricultural  Research  Service. 

Wayland,  E.  J. 

1931.  Preliminary  studies  of  the  tribes  of  Karamoja.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  61 : 187-230. 

Webb,  T.  Theodor. 

1933.  Tribal  organization  in  eastern  Arnhem  Land.  Oceania,  3:  406-411. 

Weinberg,  D. 

1 965.  Models  of  southern  Kwakiutl  social  organization : general  systems.  Yearbook  of  the  Society  for  General 
Systems  Research,  10:  169-81. 

Wentzel,  W.  F. 

1889.  Letters  to  the  Honorable  Roderic  McKenzie,  1807-1824.  In  L.  R.  Masson  (Ed.),  Les  bouregois  de  la 
compagnie  du  nord  ouest:  ricits  de  voyages,  lettres  et  rapports  inldits  relatifs  au  nord-ouest  canadien,  Serie  1.  Quebec: 
A.  Cot6. 

Westphal,  E.  O.  J. 

1 956.  The  non-Bantu  languages  of  southern  Africa.  In  A.  N.  Tucker  and  M.  A.  Bryan  Handbook 
of  African  languages,  3:  the  non-Bantu  languages  of  north-eastern  Africa.  London:  Oxford  University  Press. 
Whallon,  Robert. 

1965.  The  Owasco  period:  a reanalysis.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Chicago. 
Wharton,  R.  H.,  A.  B.  G.  Laing,  and  W.  H.  Cheong. 

1 963.  Studies  on  the  distribution  and  transmission  of  malaria  and  filariasis  among  aborigines  in  Malaya. 
Annals  of  Tropical  Medicine  and  Parasitology,  57:  235-54. 

Wheeler,  David  E. 

1914.  The  Dogrib  Indian  and  his  home.  Bulletin  of  the  Geographic  Society  of  Philadelphia,  12(2) : 47-60. 
Wheeler,  Gerald  C. 

1910.  The  tribe,  and  inter-tribal  relations  in  Australia.  London:  John  Murray. 

White,  Leslie  A. 

1959.  The  evolution  of  culture.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Whiting,  Beatrice  B.  (Ed.). 

1963.  Six  cultures:  studies  of  child-rearing.  New  York:  John  Wiley  and  Sons. 

Whiting,  J.  W.  M. 

1967.  Rearrangement  of  certain  Ethnographic  Atlas  codes.  Unpublished. 

Whiton,  Louis  C.,  H.  Bruce  Greene,  and  Richard  P.  Momsen,  Jr. 

1964.  The  Isconahua  of  the  Remo.  Journal  de  la  SociBt  des  Americanistes  (Paris),  53:  85-124. 

Wilbert,  Johannes. 

1 958a.  Die  soziale  und  politische  Organisation  der  Warrau.  Kdlner  Jeitschrift  fiir  Soziologie  und  Sozialpsy- 
chologie  (n.s.),  10:  272-91. 

1958b.  Datos  antropologicos  de  los  Indios  Piaroa.  Memorias  de  la  Sociedad  de  Ciencias  Naturales  La  Salle 
(Caracas),  18:  155-83. 

1966.  Indios  de  la  region  Orinoco-Ventuari.  Monografias  de  la  Fundacion  La  Salle  de  Ciencias  Naturales 
no.  8.  Caracas : Instituto  Caribe  de  Antropologia  y Sociologia  y Fundacion  La  Salle  de  Ciencias  Naturales. 

Williams,  B.  J. 

1969.  The  Birhor  of  Hazaribagn.  In  D.  Damas  (Ed.),  Band  societies:  proceedings  of  the  conference  on  band 
organization,  Ottawa,  30  August  to  2 September  1965,  National  Museum  of  Canada  Bulletin  No.  228: 
142-150. 

Willi ams-Hunt,  Peter  D.  R. 

1952.  An  introduction  to  the  Malayan  aborigines.  Kuala  Lumpur:  Government  Printer. 

Winter,  Edward  H. 

1956.  Bwamba:  a structural-functional  analysis  of  a patrilineal  society.  Cambridge:  W.  Heffer. 


392  References 

Wissler,  Clark. 

1926.  The  relation  of  nature  to  man  in  aboriginal  America.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press. 

WOODBURN,  J.  C. 

1 959.  Hadza  conceptions  of  health  and  disease.  In  One  day  symposium  on  attitudes  to  health  and  disease  among 
some  East  African  tribes.  Kampala,  Uganda : East  African  Institute  of  Social  Research,  Makerere  College. 

1962.  The  future  of  the  Tindiga : a short  account  of  the  present  position  and  possibilities  for  the  future  of  a 
hunting  tribe  in  Tanganyika.  Tanganyika  Notes  and  Records,  58-59:  268-73., 

1964.  The  social  organization  of  the  Hadza  of  north  Tanganyika.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  Cambridge 
University. 

Woodburn,  J.  C.,  and  Sean  Hudson. 

1966.  The  Hadza:  the  food  quest  of  a hunting  and  gathering  tribe  of  Tanzania.  (16mm  film.)  London:  London 
School  of  Economics. 

World  Health  Organization. 

1963.  Conference  on  medicine  and  public  health  in  the  Arctic  and  Antarctic.  Geneva,  28  August- 
1 September,  1962.  Technical  Report  Series,  no.  253. 

1968.  Research  on  human  population  genetics.  Technical  Report  Series,  no.  387. 

Worseley,  Peter  M. 

1961.  The  utilization  of  natural  food  resources  by  an  Australian  aboriginal  tribe.  Acta  Ethnographica, 
10(1-2):  153-90. 

Wright,  Sewall. 

1938.  Size  of  population  and  breeding  structure  in  relation  to  evolution.  Science,  87(2263) : 430-31 . 
Wynne-Edwards,  V.  C. 

1962.  Animal  dispersion  in  relation  to  social  behavior.  Edinburgh:  Oliver  and  Boyd. 

Yamada,  Munemi. 

1963.  A study  of  blood-relationship  in  the  natural  society  of  the  Japanese  macaque.  Primates  ( Journal  of 
Primatology),  4:  43-66. 

Young,  R.  B. 

1954.  British  Columbia  Pilot  (Canadian  Edition),  II:  northern  portion  of  the  Coast  of  British  Columbia. 
(3d  ed.)  Ottawa:  Queen’s  Printer. 

Zeuner,  F.  E. 

1963.  A history  of  domesticated  animals.  New  York:  Harper  and  Row. 

ZUCKERMANN,  SOLLY. 

•933-  Functional  affinities  of  man,  monkeys,  and  apes.  New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace. 


Index 


A 

Aberle,  David  F.,  et  al.,  301 
Abron,  212,  214 
residence  patterns,  212-13 
Abundance,  30,  33-39,  56-68, 
344 

relative,  index  of,  33 
temporary,  58 
Acculturation  : 

and  appointment  of  “kings,” 
143 

and  cross-cousin  marriage, 
216 

and  ethnographic  reconstruc- 
tion, 146-49 

ethnozoological  knowledge 
in,  344 

and  fertility,  203 
and  hereditary  leadership, 
140-41 

and  marriage  gerontocracy, 
205 

and  medical  factors,  244 
and  social  organization,  7,  8, 
9,  128,  179-81,  234,  332- 
33 

studies,  349-50 

Acheulian,  248,  256,  259,  275, 
277,  288,  298,  326 
Industrial  Complex,  255 
Ackerknecht,  Erwin  H.,  223, 
224,  225 

“Action  archeology,”  270,  271 
see  also  Ethnoarcheological 
studies 

Adams,  Robert  McC.,  323 
Adoption  practices,  127 
Affluent  society,  see  Original 
affluent  society 


Aggression,  and  hunting,  299, 
339-41 

Agriculturalists,  relation  to 
hunter-gatherers,  40,  54, 
72,  128,  132-33,  157-58, 
344 

Agriculture: 

crops  cultivated  by  Ge,  284 
historical  impact  of,  248,  303 
per  cent  of  human  history 
spent  in,  3,  293 
and  population  changes,  11, 
244 

practices: 

inefficient,  24,  25 
slash-and-burn,  25,  88,  95, 
249 

and  residential  stability,  72 

Ainu,  6,  15,  56,  69-77,  146-47, 
154,  231,  235 
division  of  labor,  69 
residential  patterns,  72,  73 
subsistence: 

food  resources,  71,  72 

food  storage,  72 

and  group  structure,  69-77 

Aka,  16 

Alacaluf,  19,  333 

Alaska,  317 
western,  153 

Aleuts,  153,  300,  307,  311,  313, 
314,  315,  316,  319 
anatomical  knowledge,  315 
dyadic  relationships,  153 
population  reconstruction, 
241-43 

age  pyramid  and  food-pro- 
curing ability,  241-42 
sex,  age  categories,  241-42 


training  for  kayak  hunting, 
306 

Algonkians,  17-18,  216,  336 
Alland,  Alexander,  90,  93,  95, 
155,  212,  214,  215,  244, 
245 

Allar,  16 

Allen  Island,  190 
Almeida,  Antonio  de,  15 
Amazon  Basin: 

archeological  evidence  of  riv- 
erine adaptation,  23,  26 
colonization  of,  28-29 
cultural  development,  27-28 
cultural  diversity,  23 
ecological  diversity,  23 
food  resources,  24 
Meggers-Evans  model,  28  n. 
transportation,  327 
Amazonia,  19,  23-29 
Amazon-Solimoes,  24 
Amba,  107 
Amboseli,  330 
Game  Reserve,  295,  297 
American  Indians,  4,  5,  306,  335 
see  also  various  tribes 
Amur  people,  56 
Anahuaca,  23,  25 
Anakiisak  relationship,  153 
Anastasio,  Angelo,  64 
Anatomical  knowledge  of  hunt- 
ers, 314,  315 
Andaman  Islands,  5 
Andamanese,  17,  70,  71,  127, 
232,  306,  341 
Anderson,  A.  J.,  186 
Anderson,  James  M.,  6,  8,  150, 
153-55 

Anderson,  Paul  K.,  84 


393 


394 


Index 


Andes,  344 
central,  23 
Angola,  278 

Anthropological  truth,  nature 
of,  351,  352 
Anthropology: 

evolution  of,  351,  352 
role  of,  349 

social,  limitations  of  meth- 
ods, 288 

training  in,  288-89 

archeology  and  ethnology, 
279,  288-89 
use  of  specialists,  289 
Anyula,  197 
Apache,  18,  270,  336 
Apennine  hill  villages,  249 
Aramaic,  16 
Aranadan,  16 

Aranda,  144,  147,  148,  177. 
190,  198,  199,  213,  233, 
246,  263,  274 
as  “classic  case,”  5 
dialect  subgroups,  233 
kinship  system,  165 
Aranda-type  systems,  174, 
175  n„  201,  211,  213 
number  of  patrilines,  211 
Arapaho,  281 
Arawakan,  25 

linguistic  stock,  28,  29 
Archaic,  272 

Archeological  models,  see 
Model 

Archeological  preservation: 
and  environment,  26-27,  255, 
278 

of  food  remains,  43,  282,  285, 
296  n. 

Archeological  reconstruc- 
tion: 

biologically  distinct  popula- 
tions, 274,  275 
of  disease  patterns,  222 
ethnological  analogies,  use 
and  misuse,  68,  253-54, 
258,  263-65,  268-73, 

274-75,  276,  286,  287, 
324,  345,  346 
of  land  use: 

animal  bones  and  occupa- 
tion sites,  286,  287 
population  reconstruction, 
230-31,  271,  285 


site  and  population  size, 
257-58,  271,  287,  288 
Olorgesailie,  261 
Pleistocene  variability,  288 
of  subsistence  status,  33 
art  in,  282 

difficulties  in  estimating 
diet,  33,  43,  258 
and  hunting,  288,  293-96, 
318 

preservation,  43,  282,  295 
vegetable  matter,  285-86 
vegetable-to-meat  ratio,  271 
use  of  primate  ethology,  254, 
285 

“Archeological  visibility,”  285- 
86 

Archeology: 

determination  of  occupa- 
tion’s duration,  287 
determination  of  subsistence 
base,  282 

excavation  of  Lower  Paleo- 
lithic living  floors,  276- 
77 

use  in  ethnographic  interpre- 
tation, 276,  334 
Arctic,  56 
fauna,  40 
tribes,  56 

Ardrey,  Robert,  330 
Arfak  Mountains,  314 
Argentinian  steppe,  19 
Ariangulo,  16 

Arnhem  Land,  17,  86,  87,  88, 
125,  141,  190,  192,  205, 
245 

government  settlements  of, 
147-48 

tribes,  4,  9,  10,  99,  125,  147, 
162,  165-75,  190,  194, 
224 

Art,  and  archeological  recon- 
struction, 282 
Artifacts: 

Olorgesailie,  255-57 
at  Paleolithic  sites,  277 
and  realia,  210 
shaped,  286 
Aruak,  see  Arawak 
Arunta,  see  Aranda 
Asa,  16 

Ascher,  Robert,  67,  270 
Ashanti,  213,  214 
Ashby,  W.  R.,  214 


Ashley -Montagu,  M.  F„  177, 
206 

Asmat,  281 

Athapaskans,  4,  7,  8,  9,  18,  67, 
118-25,  322,  324,  331,  336 
Australia,  138,  312 
environments: 

deserts  lacking  trace  ele- 
ments, 186 

effective  annual  rainfall, 
186,  230 

population  size  and  den- 
sity, 189-91,  231 
rainfall  range,  186,  230 
unearned  waters,  186 
water  sources,  186-87 
Australian  aborigines,  6,  7,  8, 
17,  74,  147-48,  160,  232, 
235,  236,  253,  281,  283, 
284,  308,  312,  313,  331, 
332,  333,  341,  351 
acculturation,  203,  205,  210, 
211 

“action  archeology,”  271 
classical  view,  5,  176-79 
demography,  10 

age  at  marriage,  205,  210 
fertility,  200,  203-04 
and  "marriage"  classes, 
179-84,  185-99 
Sex  ratios,  243 
tribal  population  size,  189 
see  also  under  Marriage; 
Population  density 
diet,  186-87 

and  water  sources,  186 
diffusion  of  sexual  knowl- 
edge, 200 

distinctiveness  among  hunter- 
gatherers,  336 
diversity,  176-77 
environment: 

and  land-holding  groups, 
201 

marriage  gerontocracy  and, 
205-206 

and  natural  disasters,  204 
and  subsistence,  186-87 
epidemiologic  studies,  221, 
224,  227 

field  work,  recent,  4,  177 
gerontocracy: 

as  characteristic  of  Paleo- 
lithic, 209 

and  marriage,  204-206 


Index  395 


and  peak  economic  capac- 
ity, 210 

and  polygyny,  209-10 
use  of  term,  209 
initiation  of  males: 
and  marriage,  201,  207 
as  means  of  social  control, 

207 

kinship,  138,  139,  141-42,  145 
dominant  features  of,  175 
matrilineal  descent,  138, 
142,  145 

landholding  groups,  201-203 
early  interpretations,  201- 
202 

and  environment,  201-202 
food  yield  and  group  reci- 
procity, 202 

vs.  foraging  groups,  202  n. 
and  marriage,  200-203, 
204,  208 

rights  and  marriage,  208 
seasonal  changes  in,  202 
local  groups,  99-100 
general  attributes,  234 
great  variability  of,  177 
horde,  147,  177 
landholding,  200-203,  204, 

208 

marriage,  165-75,  201-203, 
204-208,  210-12 
aboriginal  views  on,  200- 
201 

and  age  pyramid,  194-95, 
205 

demographic  influences, 
10,  11,  168-71,  175,  179- 
84,  185-99 

ecological  effects,  indirect, 
198 

individual  marriages,  de- 
terminants, 201-203 
intertribal,  188,  237 
and  kinship  terminology, 
201 

among  landholding  groups, 
201-203,  204 

and  male  initiation,  201, 
207 

population  size,  effect  of, 
198 

and  subsection  systems, 
177-79 

temporal  dimension,  201 


and  territorial  resources, 
208 

“marriage”  classes: 

ceremonial  functions,  199 
as  cosmic  classifiers,  177, 
179-80,  214 
diffusion  of,  173 
empirical  data,  180-84 
environment,  186-87,  192 
historical  aspects  of  confu- 
sion, 177-79 

and  marriage,  177-79,  188, 
201-202 

and  movement  into  new 
territory,  199 
native  view  of,  177,  214 
and  population  size,  185, 
191-92 

and  tribal  area  range,  185, 
191-92 

marriage  gerontocracy,  204- 
206 

and  acculturation,  205 
age  at  marriage,  205 
and  age  pyramid,  205 
consequences  for  older 
women,  205 

distribution  in  aboriginal 
times,  205 

economic  factors  relating 
to,  206 

and  environment,  205-206 
models,  9-10,  166-68,  177, 
212-15,  232-38,  247 
population  density: 

and  classes  (sections) , 191— 
92 

overall,  190 

and  rainfall,  142,  186,  188, 
230 

in  riverine  areas,  186,  231 
and  tribal  area  size,  188 
variations  by  environment, 
189-91,  230 

similarities  to  non-foragers, 
337 

similarities  to  other  hunter- 
gatherers,  337 
social  organization: 
special  features,  compared 
with  other  hunter-gath- 
erers, 335-37 
and  subsistence,  187-88 
sodalities,  141-42,  144 
southeastern,  social  develop- 


ment, 138-45 
and  climate,  139,  141,  142 
diagnostic  traits,  139 
gerontocracy-polygyny,  141 
hereditary  leadership,  139, 

140- 41 

problems  of  evaluation, 

141- 42 

product  of  acculturation, 
140-41 

social  stratification,  139, 
140-41 

subsistence  and  technology, 
186-87 

territorial  rights,  202 
and  marriage,  208 
tribal  area,  156-57 
and  classes  (sections),  191 
population  size  and  rain- 
fall, 186,  187 
and  rainfall,  186,  187 
tribal  distributions,  230 
tribe: 

concept  of,  246 
functions  of,  188 
size,  with  subsections,  181- 
84 

usage  of  term,  187-88 
warfare,  158 

Australians,  Southeastern,  8, 
138-45,  189-90 

Australopithecus,  293,  298,  319, 
342 

Avis,  Virgina,  74,  318,  319 
Aweikoma,  19 
Ayres,  James  E.,  270 
Azuma  valley,  72 

B 

Bacon,  Margaret  K.,  337 
Baer,  G.,  333 
Baerends,  G.  P.,  315 
Baines  Mountains,  278 
Baja  California,  18,  89 
Baldus,  Herbert,  19 
Balikci,  Asen,  4,  6,  9,  17,  40,  78, 
80,  83,  84,  113,  150,  153, 
154,  155,  327 
Balke,  Bruno,  312 
Bands: 

bilateral,  9,  19,  113,  125,  149, 
151,  161 
composition 

analysis  methods  (Helm), 
6,  9,  149,  152 


396  Index 

analysis  methods  (Wood- 
burn),  103 
Birhor,  129 
census  data,  103,  152 
creation,  duration — vari 

ables,  151 

dyadic  relationships,  150- 
52,  153,  154,  155,  161-62 
fluidity,  7,  8,  9,  107,  110, 
132,  133,  135-37,  153-55, 
156,  161 

sibling  ties,  150-52,  154 
size,  126-27,  131,  134,  155, 
161 

members,  cohesive  factors, 
156 

models,  126-31,  146-49 
organization,  126-31 

and  European  contact,  128 
patrilineal,  161 

confusion,  sources  of,  332- 
33 

environmental  factors,  333 
examples  of,  93,  333 
special  case  of  composite, 
161 

patrilocal: 

and  census  data,  129 
changes  in  size,  128,  130 
discussion,  128,  129 
earlier  formulations,  7-8 
empirical  data,  8 
flexibility,  9,  130 
model,  126-31,  146 
vs.  patrilineal  band,  149, 
150 

size,  126-27,  130,  134,  155, 
161 

constant,  with  varied  pop- 
ulation densities,  331 
and  food  concentration, 
235,  239 

ideal  (Pleistocene)  , 235 
societies,  generalizations 
about,  154-55,  335-39 
and  "special  task  groups,” 
331 

subtypes  (Dogrib)  , 118-21 
typology,  161-62 

Radcliffe-Brown,  7,  146, 

162 

Service,  7,  8,  146,  161 
Steward’s  view,  7,  161,  323 
usage: 

vs.  aggregate,  unit,  net- 


work, 154,  159-60 
vs.  camp,  103,  105,  152 
classification,  116-17 
discussion,  116 
variety  of,  161 

see  also  Groups;  Local  or- 
ganization; Magic  num- 
bers 

Bantu,  31 , 50,  132 
hunters,  16 

Barnes,  J.  A.,  185  n.,  202  n. 
Barnett,  Homer  G.,  65 
Barns,  T.  A.,  50 
Barnicot,  N.  A.,  49,  54 
Barrett,  S.  A.,  62 
Barry,  Herbert,  337 
Bartholomew,  George  A.,  Jr., 
11,  60,  84 

Basedow,  Herbert,  176,  179,  225 
Basin-plateau  tribes,  73 
Basin-type  desert  culture,  162 
Basketmaker  I,  162 
Bathurst  Islands,  205 
BaTwa,  280 

Baumhoff,  Martin  A.,  56 
Beckett,  Jeremy  R.,  140 
Behavior: 

development,  253-54,  278, 

293,  330-34 
aggression,  339,  343 
effect  of  mobility  on,  297- 
98 

ethnographic  analogy  in, 
335 

intelligence,  factors  favor- 
ing, 316-17 

primate  comparisons,  296, 
329-30 

and  range  size  increase,  297 
selection  pressures,  296-99 
sharing,  297,  298 
pattern,  hunting  as,  304-11 
Bella  Coola,  61  n.,  62 
Bellot  Strait,  83 
Bennett,  F.  J.,  49,  54 
Bentinck  Island,  147,  148,  190, 
231 

Bergdama,  15 

Bernatzik,  Hugo  Adolf,  159 
Berndt,  Catherine  H.,  74,  194 
Berndt,  Ronald  M.,  74,  177, 
187,  189,  194 

Bering  Sea  Eskimos,  111,  112, 
116 

Bertoni,  M.  S.,  19 


Bicchieri,  Marco,  4,  92,  210 
Billington,  B.  P„  224,  227 
Bindibu,  278 

Binford,  Lewis  R.,  7,  12,  90,  93, 
95,  155,  246,  247,  254, 
260,  262,  263,  265,  266, 
267,  268,  269,  272,  274, 
275,  282,  283,  287,  294, 
323 

Binford,  Sally  R.,  263,  272,  274, 
282,  283,  294,  323 
Biological  factors: 

as  cultural  preconditions,  325 
natural  selection,  297 
disease  in,  221 
individual  vs.  group,  243 
stress  and  environment,  339, 
340 
Bira,  132 
Bird,  Junius,  333 
Birdsell,  J.  B.,  4,  6,  8,  11,  60, 
84,  94,  95,  139,  142,  144, 
145,  146,  147,  148,  185  n„ 
186,  187,  188,  194,  211, 

215,  229,  230,  232,  233, 

234,  236,  243,  244,  245, 

246,  247,  248,  249,  258, 

260,  272,  295,  322,  325, 

331,  332,  333,  340 
Birhor,  6,  8,  16,  116,  126-31, 
148,  149-50,  235,  .271, 
272,  332,  333,  341 
band  composition  and  de- 
scent, 129 

residence  censuses,  129,  148 
clans,  150 
lineages,  150 
definition,  149 
lineage  mate  behavior,  149 
marriage,  130 

political-economic  symbiosis, 
128 

relations  with  agricultural 
neighbors,  128,  149 
trade,  128 

Birket-Smith,  Kaj,  73,  111,  113, 
236,  243 

Birth  control,  11,  236-37,  243- 
44,  248,  249 
Birth  rate: 

and  economics,  302 
in  hunter-gatherers,  223,  249 
Bishop,  W.  W.,  255 
Black,  Robert  H.,  227 
Bleek,  Dorothea  F.,  49 


Blyth  River,  165 

Boaz,  Franz,  5,  59,  61,  111,  313 

Bodes,  J.  J.,  17 

Boggiani,  Guido,  19 

Bogoras,  W.,  76 

Bolton,  J.  M.,  228 

Boni,  16 

Bora  ceremony,  142,  143 
Bordes,  Francois  H.,  274 
Borneo,  17 

Bororo,  19,  24  n.,  344 
Borroloola,  197 
Botany  Bay,  190 
Botocudo,  19 

Botswana,  30-31,  43,  152,  280, 
322 

Boulding,  Kenneth  E.,  272 
Boundaries,  territorial,  156-57 
and  ecological  zones,  188 
not  exclusive,  199 
Bourli£re,  Francois,  84,  295 
Brabant,  Fr.,  59 
Braidwood,  Robert  J.,  270 
Brazil,  19,  24  n. 
birth  rates,  249 
east  highlands,  26 
Eastern,  283 

Breeding  unit,  tribe,  188 
Bridges,  E.  Lucas,  8,  93,  94 
British  Academy,  261 
British  Columbia,  58 
Coast,  231 

British  Institute  for  History 
and  Archaeology  in  East 
Africa,  261 
Broad  Sound,  190 
Broken  Bay,  190 
Broken  Hill,  277 
Bronte-Stewart,  B.  O.,  et  al., 
227 

Brother-sister  exchange,  161, 
162 

Brown,  J.  A.,  263,  270 
Brues,  Alice,  295 
Buckley,  William,  202  n. 
Budongo  Forest,  100 
Bulmer,  Ralph,  210,  345 
Burera,  see  Gidjingali 
Burial,  first  appearance  of,  272, 
273 

Burundi,  16 
Busch,  Robert,  215 
Bushmen,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  15,  30-41, 
43,  49,  82,  86,  90,  110, 
125,  132,  152,  223,  224, 


225,  232,  233,  234,  235, 
237,  258,  261,  264,  274, 
277,  278,  279,  280,  283, 
284,  285,  296  n.,  297,  306, 
312,  315,  344 
Botswana,  30-31,  280 
-Dogrib  comparisons: 
diet,  323 

population  density,  323 
social  organization,  322-23 
epidemiology,  221-28 
Eskimo  comparisons,  40,  41, 
82 

Hadza  comparisons,  110 
Kalahari,  92,  279 
MaKwango,  278 
Mbuti-Ik  comparisons,  1 32— 
37 

numbers  today,  15 
related  peoples,  15 
relations  with  Bantu,  16,  30, 
31 

residence  patterns,  70 
subsistence,  31,  32 
Bushmen,  !Kung,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9, 
15,  30-41,  43,  110,  125, 
152,  154,  157,  271,  272, 
322,  323,  324,  328,  331, 
332,  335 

belief  in  witches  lacking,  92 
as  classic  case,  5 
demography: 

age  pyramids,  36 
population  density,  35 
range  size,  35 
diet,  33-35 

calories/day/person,  37,  39 
food  preferences,  34,  35 
nutritional  status,  39 
percentage  of  vegetable 
foods,  33,  34,  40 
R.D.A.,  39 

digestion  and  energy,  93,  94 
Dobe  area,  30-39,  93,  94,  152, 
157 

environment,  30-31 
available  food  species,  33, 
34 

leisure  activities,  37 
local  organization: 

camp  vs.  band,  definition, 
31 

diet,  33 

distances  moved,  33,  35 
and  food  resources,  31,  33 


Index  397 

waterholes,  31 

Nyae  Nyae  area,  92,  94,  152 
subsistence: 

composition  of  labor  force, 
33,  36-37 
food  anxiety,  94 
hunting  domesticated  ani- 
mals, 157 

mongongo  nut,  33,  278 
time  spent  in  activities,  36- 
37,  89 

work  schedules,  31,  32,  33, 
38 

trance-dance,  37 

Butchering,  and  male  coopera- 
tion, 296 
Butzer,  Karl,  73 

C 

Caiari-Uaupes  River,  25 
Caingang,  19,  152 
Cairns  rain  forest,  186,  192-93 
Calhoun,  John  B.,  231 
California: 
culture  area,  64 
Gulf  of,  18 

Indians,  18,  284,  295,  328,  336 
Callen,  E.  O.,  95,  222 
Calusa,  15 
Cambodia,  345 
Cameron,  T.  W.  M.,  95,  222 
Cameroons,  16 
Campbell,  Bernard,  340 
Campbell,  T.  D„  189-90 
Camps: 

Bushman,  31 
Hadza,  103-10 
use  of  term,  31,  103 
Canella,  90 

Canidae,  sociological  features, 
127 

Cannibalism,  24 
Cape  Flattery,  59 
Cape  Stewart,  165 
Cape  York,  Peninsula,  159,  190 
Carneiro,  Robert  L.,  24,  25 
Carpenter,  C.  R.,  100,  302  n., 
330,  342 

Carr-Saunders,  A.  M.,  222 
Cashibo,  23,  25,  29 
Casley-Smith,  J.  R.,  227 
Cave  of  Hearths,  277 
Cawte,  J.,  225 

Cayo  'Santiago  Island,  245,  343 


398  Index 
Ceramics: 

distribution  of  styles,  28 
Early  Tutislicainyo,  27 
Chagnon,  157,  158 
Chamacoco,  19 

Chamisso,  Adelbertus  de,  315 
Chang,  Kwang-Chih,  117  n.,  118 
Chenchu,  16,  149 
Chewings,  Charles,  179 
Chichimeca-Jonaz,  18 
Chiefs: 

Australian  aborigines,  139, 
140 

Northwest  Coast,  65 
see  also  Headmen 
Child,  Irving,  337 
Childe,  V.  Gordon,  269 
Child-rearing,  336,  337 

and  diffusion  of  technology, 
307 

by  foragers  and  non-foragers, 
337 

and  hunting,  300,  305-11 
training  for  kayak  hunting, 
92 

Chinook,  59,  63,  64,  65,  67 
Chipewyan,  73 
Cho'be,  245 
Chokwe,  278 
Chono,  19 
Choroti,  19 

Choukoutien,  271,  300 
Chrustov,  G.  F.,  201  n. 
Chukchee,  15,  306 
Chumash,  281 
Chuncho,  27 

Circumpolar  Stone  Age,  69 
Clactonian  industry,  328 
Clans: 

Gidjingali,  and  marriage, 
166-68,  172 
names,  149,  150 
totemic,  7-8 
Clarence  River,  190 
Clark,  J.  Desmond,  16,  254,  255, 
256,  260,  261,  267,  275 
Clark,  J.  Graham  D„  249,  286, 
287,  289,  320,  328 
Cleland,  I.  Burton,  187,  225, 
227 

Clemens,  W.  A.,  62 
Click  languages,  49 
Climate  and  subsistence,  93 
Clothing,  328 
Coahuilteco,  1 8 


Cole,  Sonia  M.,  255 
Colonization  of  Amazon  Basin, 
28 

Columbia,  19,  25,  26 
Columbia  River,  59,  62 
Comanche,  162 
Communal  hunts,  74 
Communications,  equilibrium 
system,  231-34 
Complexity  index,  226-27 
Componential  analysis,  214 
Computer  simulation: 
genealogies,  212 
population  sizes,  1 1 
Concomitant  variation,  116 
Condominias,  Georges,  17,  345 
Conference  on  Band  Organiza- 
tion, 116n.,  149 
Conference  on  Cultural  Ecol- 
ogy, 1 17  n. 

Conflict: 

resolution: 

by  fission,  9,  12,  135-36, 
156-57 

by  homicide,  12 
by  sorcery,  1 2 
and  territory,  340 
sources  of,  156 
Congo,  84,  132,  312 
Republic  of  the,  16 
River,  15 
Conibo,  29 

Conjectural  history,  165,  172, 
175,  210 

Conklin,  Harold,  88 
Controlled  comparison,  116 
archeological  application, 
267 

Cook,  Sherburne  F.,  222,  247, 
271 

Coon,  Carleton  S.,  36 
Cooperation  between  males, 
296 

Coos,  61  n. 

Coprolite  studies,  95,  222 
Coronado,  327 
Corporations,  8-9 
Coult,  Allan,  216  n. 

Cree,  216 

Crocker,  William,  4,  15,  90,  91 
Cronin,  Constance,  263 
Cross-cousin  marriage,  9-10, 
127,  130,  152,  162,  197- 
98 


computer  simulation  study, 
212 

and  European  contact,  216 
genealogical  data  for  Hare 
Indians,  216 

Northern  Algonkian  rates, 
216 

pseudo-cross-cousin  marriage, 
162 

rates  and  rules,  149,  350 
Cross-cultural: 
comparisons,  321 
method,  335,  336,  337 
Crotty,  J.  M„  227 
Crow,  James  F.,  318 
Crow-Omaha  system,  215 
Cruxent,  Jos£  M,  25,  27 
Cubeo,  26 
Culture: 

ecology,  111-13,  321-29 
Element  Survey,  18 
evolution  of 

and  division  of  labor,  298- 
99 

and  human  mobility,  297- 
98 

in  preagricultural  era, 
294-95 

interpretation.  Paleolithic 
sites,  278 

preconditions  for,  318 

biological  factors  as,  325 
Curr,  Edward  M.,  189,  190,  191 
Cybernetic  systems,  155 

D 

Daly  River,  190 
Damas,  David,  4,  8,  9,  17,  20, 
76,  83,  84,  111,  113,  115, 
116  n„  1 18  n.,  149,  154, 
246,  267 

Dansereau,  Pierre  M.,  247 
Darling  River,  232 
Darwin,  Australia,  147 
Davidson,  Daniel  S.,  187,  192 
Death,  causes  of: 
accidents,  224,  316 
parasitic  and  infectious  dis- 
eases, 221,  225 
predation,  224,  316 
social  mortality,  222,  225, 
242,  243 

starvation,  223,  242,  316 
Death  Valley,  332 
Deetz,  James  F.,  149,  150, 


160,  263,  267,  270,  281 , 
286,  323 

Deevey,  Edward  S.,  11,  94,  95, 
243,  244,  248,  249,  286 
Demography: 

cultural  influences  on,  11,  28, 
158,  179-81,  194-99,  201- 
202 

of  IKung  Bushmen,  35-36 
and  marriage,  127,  168-71, 
194-99 

and  marriage  classes,  11,  179— 
84,  185-99,  201-202 
migration,  28 
and  rainfall,  142 
and  subsection  systems,  10, 
179-84 

and  warfare,  28,  158 
see  also  Birth  control;  Popu- 
lation; Tribe 
Dene,  118n„  151 
see  also  Athapaskans;  Dogrib 
Density  equilibrium  system, 
229-31 

Dentan,  Robert,  17 
Desana,  25 
Descent: 

Australian,  138,  139,  141-42 
Birhor,  129,  130 
matrilineal,  65,  138,  141,  142, 
145,  148-149,  332 
Ona,  93 

patrilineal,  7,  8,  129,  130,  138, 
238,  332,  333 
unilineal,  8 
Desert: 
culture,  161 

environment,  185,  186,  1 88— 
91 

deSonneville-Bordes,  Denise  T-, 
274 

Detribalization,  146,  149 
Devolution,  4,  17,  25,  29,  149, 
150,  159,  350 

DeVore,  Irven,  ix,  3,  4,  68,  74, 
89,  254,  255,  274,  279, 
283,  285,  289,  297,  298, 
329,  330,  335,  339,  340, 
342,  343,  349 

Diachronic  analysis,  103,  105 
Dias,  Jorge,  15 
Dieri,  138,  144,  189 
pirauru,  138 
Diet: 

of  Bushmen,  323 


and  dental  morphology,  319 
of  IKung  Bushmen,  33-35, 
37,  39,  40 

nutritional  advantages  of  car- 
nivorous-omnivorous, 318 
in  preagricultural  period,  295 
Diffusion: 

in  Amazon  Basin,  25 
of  subsection  systems,  173 
of  technology  and  childrear- 
ing, 307 

Disease,  11,  23,  221-28 

in  agriculturalists  vs.  hunter- 
gatherers,  244 

in  hunter-gatherers,  221-28 
chronic,  223-24 
infectious,  225-28 
mental,  225 
parasitic,  225,  227-28 
and  way  of  life,  223 
in  non-human  primates,  222 
parasitic,  227-28 
and  population  control,  221- 
28,  244 

protozoan  infections,  227-28 
and  seafood,  298 
see  also  Epidemiology 
Dismal  Theorem,  the,  272 
Diversity  index,  226 
Divination,  90 
Division  of  labor: 
by  age,  54,  69,  76,  77,  241— 
42 

evolutionary  view,  74,  75,  77 
by  sex,  33,  51,  64,  69,  74,  75, 
77,  187,  241-42 
Divorce,  among  Hadza,  107 
Djaru,  198 
Dobe  area: 

of  Botswana,  30-31,  43,  152, 

322 

of  IKung  Bushmen,  30-39, 
93,  94,  152,  157 
Dobzhansky,  Theodosius,  226 
Dodos,  133 
Dog: 

domestication  of,  320 
as  hunting  aid,  294-95,  311 
for  traction  and  packing,  311, 
327 

Dogrib,  6,  9,  76,  110,  118-25, 
151,  152,  154,  332,  335 
-Bushman  comparisons: 
social  organization,  322-23 
population  density,  322, 

323 


Index  399 

socioterritorial  - groups,  118- 
24 

changes  in  size,  121 
definition  of,  118 
diagnostic  features,  120 
historical  data,  123-24 
postnuptial  residence,  121, 
124 

recruitment  to  member- 
ship, 118,  124 
subtypes,  118,  119,  120,  121 
Doob,  Leonard  W.,  225 
Dordogne,  350 
Dorobo,  16,  50 
Doyle,  Cyril  E.,  142 
Dravidian-speakers,  16 
Driver,  Harold  E.,  18,  60  n.,  66 
Driver,  Wilhelmine,  18 
Drucker,  Philip,  56,  59,  61,  62, 
63,  65,  73,  160 
DuBois,  Cora  A.,  59-60 
Dubos,  Ren£,  244 
Duff,  Wilson,  56,  63 
Duguid,  Charles,  224,  225 
Dunn,  Frederick  L.,  4,  10,  221, 
222,  224,  227 

Dunning,  R.  W.,  18,  20,  216 
Durkheim,  Emile,  213 

E 

East  Africa,  16,  345 
East  African  Institute  of  Social 
Research,  49  n. 

East  Australia,  138 
Ecology: 

disease  and  populations,  221 
diversity  and  complexity  in, 
26,  225-27 

cultural  meaning,  94 
epidemiologic  implications, 
226 

problems  of  quantification, 
94 

ideal  cases — complex  vs.  sim- 
ple, 226,  227 

of  plants  and  animals,  and 
division  of  labor,  77 
theories,  and  cycles,  249 
Economy,  subsistence  vs.  pres- 
tige, 59-60,  64,  83-89, 
113,  114,  153,  203-04, 
303,  325 
Ecosystems: 

simple  and  complex,  225-27 
tropical  forest,  26-27,  226 


400  Index 


Efe,  16 

Eggan,  Fred,  8,  85,  95,  116,  161  — 
62,  185  n„  216,  267 
Eighty  Mile  Beach,  189 
Ekblaw,  W.  Elmer,  1 1 1 
Elkin,  A.  P„  100,  165,  173,  177, 
179,  188,  189,  192,  205, 
210,  213,  234,  245 
Ellefson,  J.  O.,  302  n. 

Elliott,  Henry  W.,  313 
Elmendorf,  W.  W.,  61 
Endogamy,  and  band  size,  131 
Environment: 

biased,  in  archeological  pres- 
ervation, 254-55,  278 
carrying  capacity,  11,  244 
change,  and  adaptation,  297- 
98 

cultural: 

maximum  usage,  325 
modifications  of  ecosystem, 
286 

and  population  density, 
188-91 

and  determinism,  115 
diversity,  94,  133 
of  Eskimo,  effects,  78,  241, 
242 

and  famine,  223 
and  infectious  disease,  225, 
227 

and  landholding  groups,  201 
of  Mbuti  and  Ik,  133-37 
and  parasitic  diseases,  225- 
27 

and  population  equilibrium, 
204 
rainfall: 

and  population  density, 
186,  188,  189-91 
and  tribal  area  size,  188, 
230 

shelter  and  clothing,  328 
and  social  organization,  1 32— 
42,  185,  321-23 
flux,  132-37 

matriliny  and  social  de- 
velopment, 138,  142,  145 
patriliny  and  social  de- 
velopment, 138 
social  complexity  and  en- 
vironment, 138,  141-42 
Epidemiology,  10,  11,  221-28 
accidents,  222,  224,  243 
chronic  disease,  222,  223-24 


ecological  diversity  and  com- 
plexity, 226-27 
epidemics,  243,  244 
general  findings,  hunter-gath- 
erers, 223-25 

infectious  disease,  22,  225 
and  environment,  225,  227 
men  tal  disorders,  225 
nutrition,  diet,  39,  94,  223, 
243 

parasitic  diseases,  222,  225 
and  environment,  225-27 
predation,  222,  223,  224-25 
snake  bites,  225 
social  mortality,  222,  223 
studies,  221 

Epistemology,  and  Australian 
horde,  351 
Epulu  area,  133 

Equilibrium  systems,  in  popu- 
lation reconstruction, 
229-39 
Eravallar,  16 
Erythraic  languages,  49 
Eskimos,  4,  5,  8,  9,  17,  78-82, 
83-85,  111-17,  128,  152, 
160,  253,  281,  283,  306, 
309,  311,  313.  316,  319, 
324,  327 

Alaskan,  82,  111,  116 
Aleut,  241-43 
Anaktuvuk,  317 
Arctic,  248 

Bering  Strait,  69,  70,  73,  111, 
112,  116 

Caribou,  70,  82,  111,  236,  243 
Central,  8,  9,  83,  84,  111,  113- 
15,  116,  272 
ceremonial  activity,  80 
Chugach,  113 

Copper,  70,  74,  92,  111,  1 13- 
17 

demography,  78,  81,  82,  241- 
43 

dyadic  relationships,  153 
East  Greenland,  112 
environment,  78 

and  age  pyramid,  242 
ecological  pressures,  81,  82 
regional  differences,  82,  241 
epidemiologic  studies,  221, 
224,  227,  228,  242-43 
Iglulik,  111,  113-15 
Labrador  coast,  112 
leadership,  115 


Netsilik,  5,  6,  8,  40-41,  78, 
80-83,  84,  110,  111  n., 
113-15,  153,  243 
North  Alaskan  coastal,  73, 
111,  116 

Nunamiut,  17,  73,  111 
Nunatarmiut,  70,  73,  76 
Nunivak,  112 
Pelly  Bay,  81 
Polar,  112 

population  control,  81,  242, 
243 

population  reconstruction, 
241-43 

St.  Lawrence,  1 12 
Siberian,  112 

social  groups,  80,  81,  111,  115 
adoption,  112 
diversity,  111-13,  115-16 
family  types,  111-12 
residence  patterns.  111,  112 
seasonal  changes  in  compo 
sition,  113,  114,  115 
spouse  exchange,  112 
sodalities,  112 

subsistence,  40-41,  80-82, 

113-15 

commensal  practices,  115 
diet,  40,  84 

food  procural,  81,  82,  83 
food  storage,  80 
regional  variation  in  game, 
84 

seasonal  round,  78,  80,  113, 
114 

sharing,  80,  81,  115 
Tareumiut,  70,  73 
technology,  78 
trading,  112 
Wainwright,  307 
Ethiopia,  16,  330 
Ethnoarcheological  studies, 
278-79 

tool  making  and  use,  278-80 
use  of  historical  sources,  280 
Ethnographic  analogy,  68,  253- 
54,  258,  263-65,  268-73, 
274-75,  276-79,  286,  287, 
324,  335,  345,  350 
Ethnographic  Atlas,  46,  48, 
336,  337 

subsistence  estimates,  41-42, 
61  n. 

Ethnographic  reconstruction, 
5-6,  146-49,  287 


Index  401 


archeology  in  interpretation, 
276 

Australia,  147 
and  earlier  studies,  5,  146 
need  for  demographic,  eco- 
logical material,  147 
Northwest  Coast  (North 
America) , 62-63 
problems,  146-49 
statistical  vs.  normative  rules, 
146-49 

“survivals”  and  additions, 
149 

Ethnozoology,  314,  315 
Ethology,  99-102,  314,  315 
Evans,  Clifford,  Jr.,  23,  28  n. 
Evans,  Ivor  H.  N.,  17 
Evolution: 

of  human  behavior,  253-54, 
278,  293,  304-11,  330-34 
aggression,  339,  343 
and  carrying  devices,  297 
ethnographic  analogy  in, 
335 

factors  favoring  intelli- 
gence, 316^17 
primate  comparisons,  296, 
329-30 

and  range  size  increase,  297 
selection  pressures,  296-99 
sharing,  297,  298 
of  culture,  4,  85,  253,  260, 
263,  264,  287,  321-34 
Australian  marriage  classes, 
177-78 

biological  factors,  325 
cultural  factors,  324,  325- 
29 

Darwinian  impact,  253 
and  division  of  labor,  74 
effects  on  population,  249 
forces — causes,  effects,  proc- 
esses, 322 
history,  247 
Malthusian  model,  272 
of  preagricultural  societies, 
321-34 
"stages,”  263 
as  taxonomy,  263 
Exogamy,  130-31,  302,  336 
and  band  size,  131 
Birhor,  130 
effects  of,  130 
functions  of,  127 


among  hunter-gatherers,  127, 
130-31 
Ik,  133 

lKung  Bushmen,  152 
Eylmann,  E.,  204-205 
Eyre,  Edward  John,  88 

F 

Falkenberg,  Johannes,  179 
Family: 
gibbon,  302  n. 

and  hunting  way  of  life,  301 
matrifocal,  331,  342,  343 
usage  of  term,  343 
nuclear,  301,  330-31 
fallacy  of,  in  Eskimo,  1 13 
among  primates  (non-hu- 
man),  302  n.,  342,  343 
structural  and  natural  as- 
pects, 300-302,  343 
Family  planning,  see  Birth  con- 
trol 

Famine,  40,  54 
Fertility: 

Australian  aborigines,  203- 
204 

and  acculturation,  203 
and  population  growth,  230 
Field  work  among  hunters  and 
gatherers,  4 

Fifth  Thule  Expedition,  111  n., 
113 

Firth,  Raymond  W.,  169,  174 
Fishermen,  sedentary,  15 
Fishing,  41 

definition  of,  42,  46,  48,  61  n., 
62  n. 

methods,  327 
Fison,  Lorimer,  179,  206 
Fission,  and  conflict  resolution, 
9,  135,  136,  137,  155,  156 
Flatz,  Gebhard,  17 
Flux: 

importance  of,  135-36,  137 
social,  definition,  132 
Food: 

collecting,  hunting,  prepar- 
ing, transporting,  325-28 
definitions,  326 
concentration,  and  local 
group  size,  235,  239 
in  preagriculture  period,  295 
preservation  and  storage,  328 
vegetable,  in  prehistoric 
study,  286 


see  also  Diet;  Food  resources 
Food-gatherers,  archeological 
visibility,  285-86 
Food  resources: 
availability,  6,  24,  51,  52,  90, 
295-96 

conservation,  53,  54 
conversion,  60,  67 
distribution,  106-107,  115 
effect  on  social  organization, 
12 

Eskimo: 

food  procural,  83 
subsistence,  40-41 
food  anxiety,  6,  33,  86,  87,  94 
!Kung  Bushmen: 
available  species,  33 
food  preferences,  35 
Mbuti  Pygmies,  135,  136,  137 
Northwest  Coast,  58-64 
percentage  of  day  spent  in 
procural,  6,  86 
and  population  size,  303 
seasonal  alternatives,  84 
shortages,  58-61 
and  territoriality,  126-27 
unearned,  247 
Foraging,  definition  of,  336 
Forde,  C.  Daryll,  71,  75 
Formal  rules,  146,  148-49,  1 66— 
75,  210 

Fortes,  Meyer,  8,  213,  214,  266 
Fossiles  directeurs,  288 
Founder's  principle,  316 
Fox,,  J.  R.,  175  n. 

Fraser  valley,  58  n. 

Frazer,  James  G.,  179 
Freeman,  Derek,  300 
Freeman,  L.  G.,  248,  254,  262, 
263,  270,  287,  323,  342, 
343 

French  Canada,  birth  rates,  249 
Freud,  Sigmund,  171,  172 
Fry,  H.  Kenneth,  199 
Fuga,  16 

Fiirer-Haimendorf,  C.  von,  16 
Furness,  W.  H.,  17 

G 

Gabon,  16 
Gabus,  Jean,  15 
Gajdusek,  D.  Carleton,  305 
Gambling,  52,  53-54,  89 
Garawa,  197 

Gardner,  Peter,  4,  16,  17,  95, 


402 


Index 


146,  149,  159,  209,  248, 
341 

Garfield,  Viola  E.,  65,  66 
Gartlan,  J.  S.,  245 
Gathering: 

behavior,  344-45 
definition  of,  41-42,  46,  48, 
61  n. 

Ge,  15,  24  n.,  90,  281,  283,  284, 
285 

Gearing,  Fred,  343 
Geertz,  Clifford,  185  n. 

Genetic  mechanisms  in  hunt- 
ing societies,  315-18 
Gennep,  A.  van,  213 
Georgia  Strait,  58  n. 
Gerontocracy,  10 

as  Paleolithic  characteristic, 

209 

and  peak  economic  capacity, 
206,  210 

and  polygyny,  141,  205-06, 
209-10 

usage  of  term,  204  n.,  209 
Gerontogamy,  209 
Gibbon,  family,  302  n. 

Gibson  Desert,  189 
Gidjingali,  10,  99,  110,  165-75, 
188,  210-12 

analysis  of  marriages,  168-71 
Aranda-type  kinship  system, 
165,  174 

demography  and  formal 
rules,  168-71,  172,  175, 

210 

empirical  data  (Anbara  com- 
munity), 168-71 
fights  over  women,  170 
formal  rules,  168-75,  210 
of  kinship  groups,  166,  167 
of  marriage,  166-68,  170, 
172-73 

of  terminology,  166,  167, 
174 

rights  over  women,  170-71, 
172,  173 

subsections,  1 73—74 
survivals,  172 
Gjessing,  Gutorm,  69 
Gilbert,  Peter  Paul,  28  n. 
Gillen,  F.  J.,  74,  89,  179,  190, 
210 

Gillespie,  Baryl,  125  n. 

Gilmore,  Raymond  M.,  26 
Gilyak,  15,  70 


Ginsberg,  Benson  E.,  312,  320 
Ginsburg,  M.,  335 
Gippsland,  189 
Glass,  Bentley,  312 
Goggin,  John  M.,  15 
Goldman,  Irving,  26,  328 
Goldschmidt,  Ernest,  185,  294, 
296,  300 

Gombe  Stream  Reserve,  100 
Goodale,  Jane,  177,  179,  195 
Goodall,  Jane,  294,  329,  330, 
342,  343 

Gould,  Richard  A.,  59,  60,  64, 
66,  67 

Gournditchmara,  141 
Goy,  Robert  W.,  340 
Gran  Chaco,  19,  215 
Gran  Chaco  Indians,  13,  19, 
281 

Great  Basin,  324,  328,  329,  331 
Great  Basin  Indians,  13,  284, 
285 

Shoshoneans,  see  Shoshoni 
Great  Sandy  Desert,  189 
Greenberg,  Joseph  H.,  49 
Greene,  H.  Bruce,  25 
Greenland,  307 
Gregory  Rift  Valley,  255 
Grey,  George,  88 
Groote,  Eylandt,  17,  190,  202  n., 
203,  205,  206,  207,  246 
people,  148,  200-208 
Groups: 

composition,  analysis,  150-55 
corporate,  vs.  “parties,”  266 
corporations,  8 
economics  and  birth  rate,  302 
equilibrium  systems,  234-36 
fission,  9,  135,  136,  137,  155, 
156 

fluidity,  7,  8,  9,  107,  110,  132, 
133,  135-37,  153-55 
general  attributes  (Austral- 
ian aborigines),  234 
selection,  243 
size: 

archeological  reconstruc- 
tion, 257,  258,  261 
changes  in,  9,  12,  83,  99, 
100 

determinants  of,  155,  245- 
48 

duration  of,  158 
effective,  83 

and  food  resources,  234, 


235,  240 

historical  aspects,  247 
Pleistocene  estimates,  235- 
36,  40 

and  social  forces,  249 
tribe,  245-46 
and  work  group  size,  235 
see  also  Magic  numbers: 
Tribe 
Guahibo,  19 
Guato,  19 
Guayaki,  19,  344 
Gubser,  N.  J„  17,  111 
Guemple,  D.  L.,  152 
Guiana,  26 

Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  147,  148, 
190,  197,  231 
Gulf  Indians,  18 
Gulliver,  Pamela,  133 
Gulliver,  Philip  H.,  133 
Gunther,  E.,  73 
Gurage,  16 

Gusinde,  Martin,  19,  94,  333 
Gwydir  River,  142 

H 

Hadza,  4,  6,  9,  16,  37,  67  n.,  91, 
94,  132,  154,  155,  244, 
249,  259,  260,  272,  277, 
279,  286,  299,  300,  324, 
328,  331,  332,  337,  341, 
342 

conflict  resolution,  156 
environment,  50 
groups  of,  49-50 
kinship  and  marriage,  1 07— 
10,  148-49,  151-52,  332 
language,  49 

leisure  (gambling),  52,  53-54, 
89 

local  organization: 
camps,  103,  105,  106 
census,  105 

changes  through  time,  52, 
104-106 

definition,  103 
ecological  factors,  104,  106 
“headmen,”  105 
regularities,  106,  107-109 
sites,  105,  106 
size,  105,  155 
uxorilocality,  108-09 
nutritional  status,  54 
property  ties  among,  109, 
110 


Index  403 


relations  with  neighbors,  49, 
157-58 
subsistence: 
diet,  51,  52-53 
dining  protocol,  51 
honey-gathering,  50-53 
hunting,  51-52,  53,  259 
sharing,  53 

time  spent  in  food  pro- 
cural,  86 

vegetable  foods,  50,  51,  52-53 
technology,  51 
poison  arrows,  53 
territorial  use,  103-110 
boundaries,  104 
divisions  of  Hadzaland,  49, 
103-105 

encroachment  by  govern- 
ment, 50-51,  103 
lack  of  territoriality,  50, 
105 

names  for  Hadzaland,  104 
trade,  50 

Hadzapi,  see  Hadza 
Hagen,  Bernhard,  17 
Haida,  59,  63,  64,  65,  160 
Hainline,  Jane,  230 
Haisla,  65 

Haldane,  J.  B.  S„  224,  312 
Halkomelen  language,  58  n. 
Hall,  K.  R.  L„  297,  329,  330, 
342 

Hallowell,  A.  Irving,  216,  308 
Hamburg,  David  A.,  156,  299, 
306,  339,  340,  341 
Hamito-Semitic  languages,  49 
Hammel,  Eugene  A.,  25 
Happy-go-lucky  mentality,  89, 
90,  91 

see  also  Hunter’s  mentality 
Hardin,  Margaret,  270 
Hare,  Indians,  216 
Hart,  C.  W.  M„  192,  201,  205, 
215 

Hartland-Swann,  J.,  17 
Hawkes,  Christopher,  262 
Hazaribagh  district,  128,  150 
Head-hunting,  24 
Headmen: 

genetic  contribution  of,  317 
Hadza,  105 

personal  qualities,  317 
use  of  term  “king,”  139,  140, 
143 

see  also  Chiefs 


Health  and  disease  in  hunter- 
gatherers,  221-28 
Heinz,  H.  J.,  227 
Heizer,  Robert,  222,  247,  271, 
286,  308 

Helm,  June,  4,  8,  11,  18,  20,  60, 
84;  89,  113,  116,  118-21, 
122,  150,  151,  154,  155, 
160,  214,  216,  272,  322, 
332,  335 

methods  of  band  composition 
analysis,  6,  9,  149,  152 
Helminthiasis,  222 
Henry,  Jules,  19,  152 
Herero,  31,  157 
Hermannsburg,  Mission,  147 
Hernandez,  Theodore,  189 
Hesquiat,  59 

Hiatt,  L.  R.,  4,  7,  8,  10,  17,  89, 
90,  99,  100,  125,  146,  147, 
148,  154,  156,  157,  160, 
162,  165,  171  n.,  172, 

174  n.,  177,  179,  185  n„ 
187,  188,  190,  202,  210, 
211,  212,  213,  234,  245, 
246,  351 

Hill,  James  N.,  270 
Historical  analogies: 
disease  patterns,  221-22 
pre-Neolithic  hunters,  283- 
84 

Historical  data  on  bands,  40- 
41,  69-73,  78-81,  123, 
124 

Historical  sources,  applied  to 
archeologic  field  work, 
280 

Hobbes,  Thomas,  35 
Hobhouse,  L.  T.,  335 
Hockett,  Charles  F.,  67 
Hokkaido,  70,  72 
Holdredge,  L.  R„  226,  227 
Holm,  G„  111 

Holmberg,  Allan  R.,  19,  24,  33 
Home  base,  74,  254,  255,  298 
Home  range,  129 
Homicide,  12,  157,  158,  341 
Homo,  293 

Homo  erectus,  293,  296,  297, 
300,  302,  303,  328 
Homo  habilis,  294,  319 
Homo  sapiens,  3,  127,  278,  293, 
303,  328,  342,  345 
Honery,  Thomas,  140 
Honey -gathering,  135,  136 


Hadza,  50-53 
Ik,  136 

Mbuti,  134,  135 
mythology,  344,  345 
Honigmann,  John  J.,  18,  118 
Horde,  7-8,  202,  333 
discussion,  147 
and  epistemology,  351 
Kaiadilt,  147,  148 
mistaken  notion  of  universal- 
ity, 177 
Hose,  C.,  17 
Hottentot,  280 

Howell,  F.  Clark,  255,  261,  267, 
287,  296 

Howitt,  A.  W.,  138,  139,  140, 
141,  142,  143,  144,  145, 
179,  189,  190,  206 
Hudson,  Sean,  50 
Hudson  Bay,  78 
Hughes,  Charles  C.,  112,  224, 
225 

Humbolt  River,  162 
Hunt,  George,  61  n. 
Hunter-gatherers: 

archeological  evidence,  260, 
285-86,  296,  318 
of  hunting  methods,  288 
world  view,  296-300 
causes  of  death,  223-25,  228 
comparisons: 

cross-cultural,  46,  48,  335- 
37 

of  groups,  116-17 
with  non-foragers,  253,  336, 
337,  339 

with  non-human  primates, 
127,  222,  227,  253,  294, 
296-97,  318,  342,  350 
with  wolves,  127,  296 
cultural-ecological  adapta- 
tions, 322 

as  cultural  type,  281,  335-39, 
341,  342,  344,  345 
definitions,  4,  11,  13,  15,  29, 
30.  42,  43,  283 
historical,  4,  29,  283 
organizational,  4,  283 
distinctiveness  of  Australian 
aborigines,  335,  336,  337 
diversity  of,  228,  264,  265,  281 
emotions  of,  91,  156,  341 
equilibrium  systems  among, 
229-39 

geographical  distribution,  5, 


404  Index 

13,  14,  335 
historical  view: 

evolutionary  implications, 
74,  75,  77,  293-303,  304- 
20 

hunting  by  H.  erectus,  296 
hunting  methods,  326-27 
vs.  organizational,  4,  28, 
283 

pre-Neolithic  hunters  and 
modern  analogues,  283- 
84 

life  expectancies,  223-24 
mythology,  350 
near  high  civilizations,  150, 
159 

part-time  or  seasonal,  345 
per  cent  of  man’s  history 
spent  as,  5,  13,  293,  304, 
341 

relation  to  agriculturalists, 
133,  157-58 

ritual,  need  for  study,  160-61 
sample  of,  5,  44-48,  112,  241 
subtypes,  200-201 
fishermen,  15,  56-59 
incipient  agriculturalists, 
15,  25 

mounted  hunters,  13,  15, 
41  n. 

northern,  69,  70,  71,  72, 
78,  345 

“pure”  hunters,  42 
sedentary,  15,  56 
tropical,  26  f„  70,  71,  82. 
324 

study  of,  285-89 

as  aid  to  interpretation  of 
prehistoric  societies,  276- 
80 

future  study  areas,  289, 
344-46,  349 

recent  field  work,  4,  176-79 
survey,  1 3-20 
view  of  self,  52 
Hunters: 

and  aggression,  300,  339-41 
as  ethologists,  315 
knowledge  of  animal  behav- 
ior and  anatomy,  314-15 
mounted,  13,  15,  41  n. 
ritual  relations  with  animals, 
299 

Hunter’s  mentality,  68,  90,  91. 
94,  344 


a negative  case,  94 
among  non-hunters,  91,  344 
see  also  Nomadic  style 
Hunting: 

adjunct  to  agriculture,  24, 
132-37,  344,  345 
as  behavioral  pattern,  304-11 
cooperation  in,  296 
definition  of,  42,  46,  48,  61  n. 
degree  of  dependence  on,  24, 
25,  30,  42-43,  61-63 
with  dogs,  294-95 
of  domestic  animals,  157,  158 
evolutionary  significance, 
293-303,  304-20 
and  family  organization,  30 1 — 
302 

vs,  fishing,  65 
vs.  gathering: 

classificatory  problems,  92 
evaluation  by  hunters,  52, 
53,  94 

meaning  of  distinction,  92 
relative  importance,  135 
relative  productivity  of 
each,  7,  33,  40,  42-43,  51, 
78,  92 

by  H.  erectus,  260,  293-96 
methods,  134-35,  308-11,  324, 
326-27 

in  Paleolithic,  326,  331 
and  stature,  295 
psychological  aspects,  299- 
300 

and  social  organization,  300- 
303 

as  social  pattern,  295-96 
strategies,  90 
time  spent  in,  36-37,  86 
use  of  parts  of  animal,  311 
Huntingford,  G.  W.  B„  16,  50 

I 

Iglulimiut,  see  Eskimo,  Iglulik 
Ik,  16,  91,  110,  156,  245 
economics,  cycle  of  agricul- 
ture and  hunting,  133 
environment,  133-34,  136 
and  fluid  social  organiza- 
tion, 135-36,  137 
ethnic  identification,  133 
kinship,  133 

land  use  and  group  size,  134 
political  authority,  136 


settlement  during  agricul- 
tural cycles,  133,  136 
social  organization,  fluidity 
of,  132,  135-36,  137 
subsistence  techniques: 
gathering  and  major 
moves,  1 34 

hunting  with  net  and 
spear,  134-35 

Immobilization  of  game,  309 
Incest  taboo,  301 
India,  hunters,  16 
Indonesia,  17 
mythology,  344 

Infanticide,  11,  66,  81,  239, 
242,  243,  248,  302,  316 
lack  of,  in  Australian  tribes, 
203-204 

sex  preference  in,  236-37 
Ingalik,  73,  76,  77 
Initiation  of  males,  Australian 
aborigines,  201,  207 
Iputiak,  235 
Iraqw,  103 

Irrigation  hypothesis,  323 
Irula,  16 

Irving,  William  N.,  73 
Isaac,  Glynn  L.,  210,  244,  255, 
255,  256,  288,  326 
Isanzu,  49,  54,  104,  148 
Isconahua,  24,  25 
Isimila,  255,  256 
Isumataq,  115 
Italmen,  15 

Ituri  forest,  16,  132-37,  245 
Ivory  Coast,  212 

J 

Jankuntjatara,  198 
Japan,  government,  72 
Japan  Current,  58 
Japan  Monkey  Center,  343 
Jay,  Phyllis  C„  245,  293  n. 
Jelliffe,  D.  B.,  54 
Jenness,  Diamond,  70,  73,  74, 
112,  113 

Jochelson,  W„  16,  69,  73,  77 
Johnston,  T.  Harvey,  186,  187 
Jones,  Ernest,  171 
Jural  rules,  9,  152 

K 

Kaberry,  Phyllis  M.,  177,  179, 
198 

Kadar,  16 


Index  405 


Kaiadilt,  8,  147,  190,  231 
Kalahari  Desert,  5,  30,  86,  308, 
312 

Kalambo  Falls,  255,  256,  277, 
286 

Kangeju,  see  Hadza 
Kamchadal,  15 

Kamilaroi,  138,  139,  140,  232 
Bora  ceremony,  143 
council  of  elders,  143 
headmen,  142-44 
hereditary  chiefs,  144 
matrilineal  descent,  145 
sodalities,  144 
Karankawa,  18 
Kariera,  146,  179,  189 
Karigi,  112,  116 
Karimojong,  133 
Karok,  60  n. 

Karsten,  Rafael,  19 
Kawamura,  Syunzo,  343 
Kayak: 

hunting,  training  for,  92, 
306-307 

technology,  92,  327 
Kelez,  George  B.,  62 
Kelly,  Isabel  T„  332 
Kendrew,  W.  G.,  63 
Kenton,  Edna,  89 
Kenya,  132,  254,  261,  295,  297 
Kerr,  D.,  63 
Ket,  16 

Kimberley  district,  189,  192, 

198,  233 

Kindiga,  see  Hadza 
“King,”  use  of  term,  139,  140, 
143 

King  William  Island,  81 
Kinship,  20 

Australian,  138,  139,  141-42, 
145 

behavior,  91 

Birhor,  127-29,  130,  149 
Dogrib,  118,  120,  121,  124 
dyadic  relationships,  108-109, 
110,  151-52 
Eskimo,  111-12 
Gidjingali,  165-67,  173-74 
Hadza,  107-109 
Levi-Strauss  and  study  of, 
210-11 
lineage: 

band,  127-29,  130 
definition  (Birhor),  149 
patrilocal  vs.  patrilineal. 


149,  150 

name  relations,  152-53 
native  theories,  345 
among  Northwest  Coast  In- 
dians, 65 
patrician,  100 

in  posse,  in  esse : discussion, 
150-51 

principles,  166,  351 
and  residential  patterns,  121, 
124-25 

Shoshoni,  161-62 

sibling  ties,  150-52 

and  social  organization,  127 

and  subsection  systems,  188 

terminology: 

Crow,  152 
Crow-Omaha,  215 
Dakota,  162 
Eskimo,  152 
Hawaiian,  149 
Iroquois,  149 
Omaha,  152 
unilineal  systems,  8 
Klallam,  61  n.,  70 
Klamath  River,  62 
Klein,  Richard  G.,  267,  283 
Kleindienst,  Maxine  R.,  261, 
270,  274,  275 
Knight,  Rolf,  152 
Kodiak,  108 
Kodiak  Island,  241 
Koford,  Carl  B.,  303 
Koniags,  223,  307 
Koroca,  15 

Koryak,  15,  69,  70,  73 
Korwa,  16 
Kostienki,  283 
Kraisri,  N.,  17 

Kroeber,  A.  L„  5,  18,  56,  62,  64, 
66,  185 

Krogman,  W.  M.,  224 
Krzwicki,  Ludwik,  188,  191, 

224,  225,  246 
Kubu,  17 

Kuchin,  70,  7i  116,  150,  151 
Kuggup,  81,  83 
Kuhn,  Thomas  S.,  215 
Kummer,  H.,  330 
Kunian,  198 

Kunstadter,  Peter,  et  al. , 212 
Kuringal  ceremony,  142 
Kurnai,  139,  141,  144 
Kurt,  F.,  330 
Kurumba,  16 


Kutchin,  see  Kuchin 
KwakiutI,  59,  61,  62,  63,  65,  67, 
264,  281 

Kwashiorkor,  37,  54 
Kwepe,  15 
Kwise,  15 

L 

Labor,  division  of: 

and  evolution  of  culture, 
298-99 

among  hunter-gatherers,  154, 
335 

by  sex,  33,  51,  64,  187,  296 
Lack,  David,  248 
Lactation,  1 1 
Lake  Christopher,  189 
Lake  Eyasi,  49,  104,  105 
Lake  Eyre,  138,  187 
Lancaster,  C.  S.,  vii,  7,  74, 
293 

Lancaster,  Jane  B.,  294 
Land  use: 

archeological  findings,  256- 
58,  288 

among  Australian  aborigines, 
7-8,  199,  202,  208 
environmental  and  demo- 
graphic components, 
188-91 

and  marriage  classes,  199 
named  localities,  156-57 
rights,  202 

and  marriage,  208 
tribal  area  and  rainfall,  230 
Lane,  Barbara  S.,  175  n. 
Language: 

dialect  differentiation,  233 
distribution,  and  past  popu- 
lation movements,  27-29 
and  population  density,  231- 
34 

Lanning,  Edward  P.,  25 
Lantis,  Margaret,  1 12 
La  Quina,  277 
Larsen,  Helge,  70,  73,  76 
Lasker,  Gabriel  W.,  316 
Late  preagricultural  period, 
see  Mesolithic 

Lathrap,  Donald  W.,  4,  23,  27, 
42,  93,  94,  215,  350 
Lathrap,  Joan  W.,  23  n. 
Latitude,  number  of  species, 
and  subsistence,  142,  143 
Lattimore,  Owen,  86 


406  Index 

Latumne,  Syria,  256 
Laughlin,  William  S.,  4,  5,  7, 
41,  92,  93,  150,  153,  154, 

215,  241,  242,  243,  300, 

304,  308,  312,  314,  315, 

316,  317,  320,  340,  341 

Law  of  the  optimum,  247 
Lawrence,  William,  179 
Laziness,  of  hunter-gatherers, 
89 

Leach,  E.  R.,  10,  146,  159, 

175  n. 

Leacock,  Eleanor  B.,  18 
Leakey,  L.  S.  B.,  258,  259,  261 
Lee,  Richard  B.,  viii.  ix,  3,  4, 
7,  8,  9,  15,  30,  31  n„  36  n„ 
37,  61  n„  68,  82,  85,  88, 
89,  92,  93,  146,  150,  152, 
154,  155,  156,  157,  223, 

258,  260,  271,  274,  279, 

281,  283,  285,  295,  296, 

297,  322,  324,  332,  336, 

344 

Lehman,  F.  K.,  23  n.,  159 
Leibig’s  law,  11,  60,  84,  247, 
303,  325 

Leisure,  6,  36-37,  82,  85,  89 
Le  Jeune,  Fr.,  89 
Lenski,  Gerhard,  36  n. 

Lese,  132 

Leshnik,  Lorenz  S.,  270 
Le  Souef,  Albert  A.  C.,  140,  141 
Levine,  Robert  A.,  324 
Levi-Strauss,  Claude,  6,  12,  19, 
125,  165,  166  n„  210,  213, 
214,  215,  289,  296,  344, 
349 

on  marriage  regulations,  165, 
171-72,  174 

and  reciprocity,  165,  175 
and  study  of  kinship,  10,  171  — 
74,  210-11 

Life  expectancies  of  hunter- 
gatherers,  223-24 
Lillooet,  18 
Lineage-band,  127,  128 
Birhor,  129,  130 
Lineage  organization,  127,  128, 
129,  148,  149-50 
LinnC  Sigvald,  314 
Linton,  Ralph,  113,  271 
Liverpool  River,  165,  245 
Livi,  Livio,  249 
Livingstone,  Frank  B.,  221,  224 
Local  organization,  335 


and  acculturation,  234 
description  of  ideal  group 
Australian  aborigines,  240 
Pleistocene,  235-36,  240 
Eskimo,  80,  113,  115 
fluidity,  7,  8,  9,  107,  110,  132, 
133,  135-37 
and  idealogy,  153-55 
seasonal  changes,  160,  161 
and  formal  rules,  146,  148-49 
group  composition,  analysis, 
150-55 

group  movements,  in  war- 
time, 158 
sites,  148,  154 

archeological  evidence, 
256-61 

size  of  groups,  9,  12,  83,  99, 
100,  155,  158,  234-36, 
240,  245-48,  249 
sec  also  Bands;  Groups;  So- 
cial organization;  Tribes 
Lolui  Island,  245 
Longacre,  William  A.,  263,  270 
Lorenz,  Konrad,  299 
Lorimer,  Frank,  249 
Lounsbury,  212,  215 
Lovelock  Cave,  222 
Lowie,  Robert,  26,  319,  327,  336 
Lumholtz,  Carl,  189 
Lummi,  61 
Lunda,  278 
Lunga,  198 
Lurie,  Nancy  O.,  18 

M 

McArthur,  Margaret,  86,  87. 
125 

McCarthy,  Frederick  D.,  86,  87, 
125 

Macdonald,  George,  225 
McDougall,  W.,  17,  189  n. 
McGee,  W.  J„  18 
Mcllwraith,  Thomas  F.,  62 
McKennan,  Robert  A.,  18,  73 
Mackenzie  River,  329 
MacNeish,  June  Helm,  see 
Helm,  June 
MacNeish,  R.  S.,  90 
MacNeish,  V.  H„  216 
McPherron,  Alan,  270 
Macro-Arawak  linguistic  stock, 
27-29 
Macii,  25,  29 
Magic: 


and  hunting,  37 
lack  of,  91,  92 

Magic  numbers,  11,  155,  230, 
231,  232,  245-48,  331, 
333 

empirical  data  for  Australia, 
245 

discussion,  246 
historical  aspects,  247,  248 
Maingard,  J.  F„  223,  224,  227 
Mair,  Lucy,  301,  302 
Maitland,  142 
Majumdar,  D.  N.,  16 
Makah,  59,  64 
Malapandaram,  16 
Mala  Vedan,  16 
Malaya,  17 

Malinowski,  Bronislaw,  171  n., 
265 

Malnutrition,  11 

in  Eskimo  population,  243 
see  also  Epidemiology 
Malthusian  equation,  231 
Man,  E.  H.,  17 
Man: 
diet,  313 

physiological  tolerance,  312 
sensory  apparatus,  312 
Mangbetu,  132 
Mangetti  nut,  33 
Maningrida,  165 
Mann,  G.  V.,  et  al„  224,  227 
Manning,  T.  H.,  113 
Marcoy,  Paul,  25 
Marginality,  5,  30,  43,  82,  83, 
84,  85,  93,  132.  134,  245, 
341,  342 
Mariat^,  25 
Marriage: 

asymmetric  prescriptive  alli- 
ance, 25 

Australian  aborigines,  165— 
75,  201-203,  204-208, 

210-12 

demographic  influences, 
10,  11,  168-71,  175,  179- 
84,  185-99 

and  landholding  groups, 
200,  203,  204 

and  male  initiation,  200, 
207 

population  size  and  mar- 
riage sections,  185-99 

and  subsection  systems, 
177-79 


Index  407 


Birhor,  130 
bride  service,  130 
and  tribal  size,  232 
brother-sister  exchange,  161, 
162 

cousin,  81 

Hare  data,  216 
cross-cousin: 

among  Arctic  Indians,  216 
among  Australian  abori- 
gines, 19V— 98 
demographic  stability,  127 
Dogrib,  121,  124 
gerontocracy,  204-206,  209- 
10 

gerontogamy,  209 
Gidjingali,  165-75 
group  marriage,  138 
Hadza,  107-108,  151 
IKung  Bushmen,  152 
Mbuti,  156 

niece  exchange,  166-68,  172, 
173,  174,  175 

polygyny-gerontocracy,  as 
world-wide  phenomenon, 
207  n. 

rights,  exercise  of,  168-71 
rules: 

mathematical  treatment 
(Natchez),  215 
and  subsections,  9-10 
sister  exchange,  130,  156,  211, 
212 

spouse  exchange  (Eskimo) , 
112 

ties,  and  social  organization, 
126-31 

Marsh,  Gordon  H.,  308,  315 
Marshall,  Lorna,4,  8,  15,31  n., 
36,  37,  40,  86,  92, 

94,  125,  150,  152,  153, 
154,  232,  235,  237 
Marten  Lake  People,  121  n., 
124 

Masai  Amboseli  Reserve,  295 
Mason,  J.  Alden,  275 
Masset,  63 
Mataco,  19 
Material  culture: 
and  activity  groups,  265,  266, 
267 

and  archeological  theory,  265 
Mathews,  R.  H.,  140,  142, 143, 
144 

Mating  behavior,  and  hunting, 


315,  316,  317 
Mato  Grosso,  221 
Matriliny,  65,  138,  141,  332 
and  social  development,  138, 
142,  145 
Mauritania,  15 
Mauss,  Marcel,  12,  80 
Maybury-Lewis,  David,  171 
Mayoruna,  24 
Mayr,  Ernst,  314,  316,  317 
Mbaya,  215 

Mbuti  Pygmies,  4,  8,  9,  16,  50, 
110,  132-37,  149,  154, 
157,  224,  235,  244,  245, 
279 

conflict  and  its  resolution, 
156 

environment,  133-34,  136, 

137 

field  work  among,  1 32-33 
food  resources,  135,  136,  137 
political  authority,  132,  136, 
137 

population  figures,  132 
relations  with  agricultural 
neighbors,  132-33 
social  organization: 
fluidity,  132,  134-37 
subsistence  techniques,  intra- 
cultural  divisions,  132, 
134,  135 

territory,  134,  135 
Medicine  men,  92 
Meggers,  Betty  J.,  23,  28  n. 
Meggitt,  M.  J.,  4,  8,  10,  17,  30, 
41  n„  99,  100,  146,  148, 
162,  174,  176,  177,  179, 
181  n„  185  n„  186,  188, 
189,  190,  195,  197,  202, 
206,  213,  214,  233,  234, 
238 

Melanesia,  17 
Melville  Island,  157,  205 
"Memory  cultures,”  5,  93,  94, 
128-29 

formal  rules  in,  146,  148-49 
Menovshchikov,  G.  A.,  112 
Merbs,  Charles,  242,  267 
Merker,  M.,  16 
Merrill,  Annabel  L.,  33 
Mesoamerica,  323 
Mesolithic  adaptations,  7,  272, 
273,  303,  325 

and  changes  in  stature,  295 
conquest  of  water,  294 


domestication  of  dog,  294-95 
gathering,  preparation  of 
food,  295-96 

Mesolithic  (era) , 286,  294-96, 
303 

Mesopotamia,  323 
Methodology,  re  cause  and 
effect,  321-24 

M^traux,  Alfred,  19,  23,  25 
Micronesia,  17 
Microorganisms,  definition, 
225  n. 

Migliazza,  E.,  19 
Migration,  28 

founder’s  principle,  316 
Miller  Institute  for  Basic  Re- 
search in  Science,  294  n. 
Missionization,  23 
Mitchell,  S.,  259 
Mobility,  24,  86 
factors  involved  in,  106-107 
price  paid  for,  297-98 
and  property,  106 
Mocovi,  19 
Models: 

archeological,  287,  334 
and  ethnography,  288,  289 
with  minimal  analogy,  265, 
266,  267 

pitfalls,  270,  275 
band: 

earlier  work,  146-49 
and  group  structure,  146 
patrilocal,  9,  126-27,  149— 
50 

population  reconstruction, 
10-11 

computer  simulation,  11 
equilibrium,  229-39 
local  group  size,  126-27, 
131,  134,  155 
mating,  126-31 
of  tribes,  231-33,  247 
pre-Neolithic  cultures,  29 
sociological: 

deviations  from  jural  rules, 
212-13 

and  empirical  "reality,” 
350,  351 

mechanical  vs.  statistical, 
212-15 

natives’,  214-15 
as  original  native  theory, 
351 

vs.  "types,”  322 


408  Index 


Moieties: 

Gidjingali,  173 

in  interpretation  of  social 
unit,  284 

Momsen,  Richard  P.,  Jr.,  24,  25 
Mongongo  nut,  33 
Montagnais,  89 
Mooney,  James,  56 
Moore,  Omar  K.,  90 
Morey,  Robert,  19 
Morgan,  John,  202  n. 

Morgan,  Lewis  Henry,  20,  179 
Motulsky,  Arno  G.,  221,  224 
Mousterian,  73 

first  appearance  of  style 
dines,  275 
Mount  Burr,  189 
Mount  Gambier,  189 
Movius,  Hallam  L.,  Jr.,  271 
Mrabri,  17 
Munda,  16,  149,  150 
Mura,  29 

Murchison  Falls,  295 
Murdock,  George  Peter,  viii,  4. 
10,  13,  41,  56,  61  n., 
109  n„  115,  159,  179,  303, 
335,  336,  337 
Murinbata,  179,  190 
Murngin,  86,  165,  179,  190,  192 
Murray  River,  138,  186,  189, 
231,  232 

Murray-Darling  river  system, 
142,  186,  190 
Musgrave  ranges,  189 
Musgrave-Mann-Tomkinson 
ranges,  190 
Mythology: 

and  activities,  344 

and  theories  of  kinship,  350 

N 

Nadel,  S.  F„  116,  266 
Nairobi,  330 
Nairobi  Park,  299 
Nambikwara,  6,  9,  19.  125,  335, 
344, 350 

Name  relations: 

Arctic  peoples,  153 
description,  among  Bushmen, 
152 

Napier,  John  R.,  297 
Napore,  133 
Naroll,  Raoul,  247,  271 
Naskapi,  90, ‘ 152,  216 
Nass  River,  59,  65 


Natchez  Indians,  215 
National  Museum  of  Canada, 
116n.,  149  n. 

Natural  man,  342 
Neanderthalers,  73 
Needham,  Rodney,  10,  25,  33, 
89,  212 

Neel,  James  V.,  et  al.,  221,  223, 
224,  225,  317 
Negritos,  Congo,  327 
see  also  Pygmies 
Negrito  hunters,  17,  333 
see  also  Pygmies 
Nemadi,  15 

Nelson,  Edward  W.,  69,  73 
Nelson,  Richard  King,  307 
Neolithic,  85,  283,  284 
Netsilik  Eskimo,  6,  8,  40,  80-83, 
110,  111  n„  113-15,  243 
ceremonial  activity,  80 
as  classic  case,  5 
demography,  78,  81,  82 
diet,  84 

dyadic  relations,  153 
food  procural,  83 
group  structure,  80-81,  113', 
115 

regional  variation  in  game, 
84 

subsistence,  40-41,  78,  80-82, 
113-15 

technology,  78 
Network,  vs.  society,  159-60 
Nevada,  332 
Neville,  Melvin,  343 
New  Guinea,  314,  345 
highlands,  131 

New  South  Wales,  138,  140, 
142,  143,  145,  186,  189, 
190 

New  Zealand,  286 
Ngadadjara,  198 
Niangea,  133 
Niblack,  Albert  P.,  59 
Niece  exchange,  166-68,  172, 
173,  174,  175 
Niger  River,  15 
Nilgiri  Hills,  16 
Nimuendaju,  Curt,  23,  24 
Njamal,  233 

Noble,  G.  Kingsley,  27-28 
Nomadic  styles,  11-12,  68,  69- 
73,  86,  89,  91,  106,  107, 
113,  132-37,  160 
see  also  Hunter’s  mentality 


Noone,  H.  V.  V.,  187 
Nootka,  59,  61,  63,  65,  70 
Nordenskiold,  Erland,  19 
North  Alaskan  Eskimos,  111, 
112,  116 

North  Pacific  Coast  Indians,  15, 
56-68 

Northern  Athapaskans,  18 
Northern  Territory  (Austral- 
ia), 190 

demography  and  subsections, 
180-84 
economy: 

economic  conversion,  60, 
67 

market  economies,  67 
money,  66 
potlatch,  66,  67 
and  slavery,  65-66 
“subsistence”  vs.  "pres- 
tige,” 59-60,  64,  67 
women,  and  food  preserva- 
tion, 64 

environment,  58-61 
climate,  58,  63 
fauna,  58 

food  shortages,  58-60 
ethnographic  reconstruction, 
methods,  62-63 
food  resources: 

Kwakiutl  subsistance  activ- 
ities, 61  n. 

Nootka  dietary,  61  n. 
and  population  adjust- 
ments, 66-67 

quantities  of  food,  infer- 
ences, 60,  61-63 
shortages,  58-59,  60  n. 
surplus  and  social  organi- 
zation, 66-67 
population,  56,  66-67 
social  organization,  64-67 
storage  methods  for  food,  63- 
64 
values 

and  food  procural,  59-60, 
64-67 

and  social  organization, 
64-67 

Notes  and  Queries  in  Anthro- 
pology, 109 
Nutrition: 

and  disease  severity,  244 
in  hunter-gatherers,  223 
mineral,  244 


o 

Oakley,  Kenneth  P.,  318 
Oblate  Census,  123,  124 
Odum,  Eugene  P.,  226,  247 
Ojibwa,  216 
Okarango  River,  30 
Oldowan  tradition,  288 
Olduvai  Gorge,  255,  277,  288 
Olorgesailie,  254-55,  277 
food  remains,  258-59 
species  represented,  259-60 
hunting  methods,  hypotheti- 
cal, 260-61 
locations,  256 
occupation  sites,  256-58 
reconstructed  picture,  260-61 
Omigua,  24,  25 
Ona,  8,  19,  42,  93,  94,  333,  341 
Ooldea  region,  186,  189 
Opler,  Morris,  18 
Original  affluent  society,  83-89, 
153,  203-204,  303,  325 
Orinoco  River,  19,  27,  28 
Osborne,  R.  H.,  316 
Osgood,  Cornelius  B.,  18,  73, 
75,  77,  122,  123,  124 
Ova  Tjimba,  278 
Owen,  Roger  C.,  4,  18,  89,  90, 
157,  246,  282,  287 
Owens  Valley,  72,  162 
Ozette,  59 

P 

Pacific  Coast  Indians,  4,  5 
Paiute,  70,  71,  72,  76,  161,  162, 
332 

Paleocology,  222 
Paleolithic,  4,  85,  86,  209,  247, 
276-78,  280,  282,  284, 
286,  311 
band  size,  131 
groups,  models  for,  126-31 
hunting  methods,  324,  326, 
331 
Lower: 

house  site,  344 
hunting  methods,  324,  326 
Neolithic  excavation  tech- 
niques, 276 
occupation  areas,  277 
preservation  bias,  253 
Middle,  preservation  bias, 
253 

social  organization,  283 
Upper,  68,  287,  334 


archeological  visibility, 
285-86 

bone  remains  and  seasons, 
287 

and  evolution,  345 
hunting  methods,  326,  331 
occupation  lengths,  282 
style,  275 

time  period  of,  294 
tools,  313 

Paliyans,  16,  95,  149 
gerontogamy  among,  209-10 
Palmatary,  Helen  Constance, 
23 

Panoan  linguistic  stock,  29 
Panoan  tribes,  24,  29 
Parasites,  227-28 

accommodation  to  popula- 
tion, 244 
definition,  225  n. 
in  early  man,  222 
Parasitic  mentality,  see  Hunt- 
er’s mentality:  Nomadic 
style 

“Parties,”  266 
Pise,  25 

Pastoralism,  336,  337 
and  hunters,  15 
Siberia,  16 
Patagonia,  13 
Patagonian  Indians,  13 
Patrilineage,  93,  129,  130,  138, 
238 

bands,  332,  333 
and  social  development,  138 
Pehrson,  Robert  N.,  150 
Peking  man,  271 
Pelly  Bay,  84 
Penan,  89 
Penang,  17 

Peninj,  Tanzania,  256 
Perrot,  J.,  274 
Peruvian  Montana,  24,  27 
Petermann  ranges,  189 
Petitot,  Emile,  122,  123,  124 
Philippines,  17 
Phi  Tong  Luang,  17,  159 
Phoenix,  Charles  H.,  340 
Photographs,  use  in  ethnogra- 
phic field  work,  148 
Piaroa,  19 

Piddington,  Marjorie,  177 
Piddington,  Ralph,  177 
Piddocke,  Stuart,  59,  67 
Piggott,  Stuart,  320,  328 


Index  409 

Pilling,  Arnold  R.,  4,  17,  138, 
141,  142,  156,  157,  201, 
210.  215,  286 

Pirauru  marriage  practice,  138 
Pitjandjara,  190,  194,  198 
Plains  Indians,  13,  18,  41  n., 
327,  329,  333 

Plant  domestication,  initial  pe- 
riod of,  90 
Plateau,  56,  64 
Plateau  Indians,  13,  18 
Plato,  166,  351 

Pleistocene,  4,  7,  11,  272,  273, 
284,  296  n.,  335 
hunters,  253-61 
infanticide  rates,  243,  248 
Lower: 

environmental  bias  to  sites, 
255 

ethnographic  analogies,  274 
nature  of  evidence,  260-61 
Middle: 

environmental  bias  to  sites, 
255 

ethnographic  analogies, 
274-75 

nature  of  evidence,  260-61 
occupation  sites,  location 
and  size  of,  256-58 
population  reconstruction, 
229-39 
sites,  288 
"stages,”  288,  339 
terminal,  population  size 
changes,  247 

Upper,  environmental  bias 
to  sites,  255 
Plomley,  N.  J.  B.,  17 
Poison,  51,  53 
development  of,  314 
extraction  of,  328 
Poliomyelitis,  91 
Polunin,  Ivan,  224,  225,  228 
Polygyny,  336 

age  at  marriage  in,  209 
among  Australian  aborigines, 
204-206,  208,  209-10 
Polynesia,  17,  199 
Poole,  Francis,  59,  64 
Population: 

"bottlenecks,”  242,  316 
coastal,  247 
composition: 

age  and  food-procuring 


410  Index 

ability,  241-42 
and  agricultural  revolu- 
tion, 244 

factors  involved  in  changes, 
245 

local  groups,  10-11 
“marriage  classes,”  effect 
on  ideal  operation,  1 94— 
98 

and  mates,  number  of  eligi- 
ble, 194-97 

primate  studies,  244-45 
Wynne-Edwards  contro- 
versy, 248 

density,  10-11,  315,  331 
and  animal  productivity, 
95 

Australian  aborigines,  1 89— 
91 

Bentinck  Island,  147,  148, 
190 

change,  229,  230,  244 
and  culture,  231,  232,  233 
definition,  229 
dependent  factors,  247 
and  environment,  147,  186, 
188,  189-91,  231,  239 
Micronesia,  230 
Pleistocene,  230-31,  260 
quantification,  229-30 
and  rainfall,  142,  186,  188 
in  riverine  areas,  186,  231, 
239 

Shoshoni,  230 

effective  breeding,  10,  11, 

237-39 

model  with  time  depth, 
238 

genetics,  126-27 
longevity,  242,  248,  316 
models: 

computer  simulation,  11 
ideal  sizes,  10 
parameter,  185-86,  188 
reconstruction,  230-31,  233, 
235-36,  237,  239,  240, 
241-43,  248,  258,  260, 
316 

redistribution,  66,  68,  127, 
161 

regulation: 
disease  in,  221 
variables  contributing  to, 
222-23 

sex  ratio,  159,  236,  243,  302 


size  and  marriage  classes, 
185-86 

stability  (equation) , 222 
see  also  Birth  spacing; 
Groups;  Population 
control 

Population  control,  236-37, 
239,  242,  243,  248,  316, 
317 

cultural  practices,  11,  74,  91, 
204,  242,  243,  248 
disease  in,  244 
infanticide,  11,  66,  81,  203, 
204,  236-37,  239,  242, 
243,  248,  302,  316 
measurements,  221-23 
morbidity  and  mortality,  11, 
203,  204,  221-28,  244, 
316 

by  neighbors,  157-58 
physiological  factors,  243 
Port  Augusta,  189 
Port  Hardy,  63 
Posnansky,  Merrick,  258,  345 
Potlatch,  66,  67 
Preagricultural  societies,  cause 
and  effect  relationships 
in  evolution  of,  321-34 
Predator  effects,  95 
Predation,  157-58 
as  cause  of  death,  224 
human  hunters  as  major 
predators,  295-96 

DnpuiCTAntQ  • 

hunters: 

and  environment,  283 
isolation  from  Neolithic  in- 
fluences, 283 

social  organization,  282-84 
societies,  sites  and  survival 
patterns,  277-80 
Pre-Neolithic  society,  283,  284 
Price  et  al.,  227 
Primates  (non-human): 
aggression,  340 
disease  patterns  in,  222 
economic  relationship,  301, 
302 

"family”  in  gibbon,  302  n. 
group  composition,  330 
group  and  territory  size,  330 
hunting,  342 

mother-young  group,  300, 
342,  343,  344 


population  size  changes,  244- 
45 

range  of,  296-97 
scavenging,  342 
sociological  features,  127 
studies: 

long-term,  342,  343 
proper  use  of,  349 
subsistence,  318,  329 
Prince  Rupert,  63 
Property: 

inheritance  and  lineage,  149 
and  mobility,  12,  106 
rights,  8,  9, 

tangible  and  intangible,  150 
ties,  among  Hadza,  109,  110 
Proto-Hopi  area,  162 
Pueblo  Indians,  341 
Punaba,  198 
Punan,  17 
Puri,  19 

Putnam,  Patrick,  132 
Puyallup,  61  n. 

Pye,  Orrea  F.,  39 
Pygmies,  African,  50,  84,  225, 
249,  272,  280,  283,  284, 
306,  309,  315,  327,  333 
camp  life,  341 
epidemiologic  studies,  221 
as  hunters,  295 
parasite  species  numbers,  227 
relations  with  Bantu,  16 
see  also  Mbuti  Pygmies 

Q 

Queen  Charlotte  Islands,  59 
Queen  Elizabeth  Parks,  295 
Queen  Maud  Gulf,  83 
Queensland,  138,  145,  186,  190, 
192 

Quileute,  59,  61  n. 

Quimby,  G.  I.,  266,  270 

R 

Radcliffe-Brown,  A.  R.,  5,  7, 
17,  71,  99,  100,  127,  128, 
144,  145,  146,  147,  161, 
162,  172,  177,  189,  190, 
192,  210,  211,  225,  246, 
333 

principles  of  kinship,  8,  10, 
351 

Rainey,  Froelich,  70,  73,  76 
Rainfall,  60  n„  186,  188-91,  230 
effective  annual,  186 


Ranchi  district,  150 
Range  size: 
effects,  297-98 

of  non-human  primates,  296- 
97 

and  technology,  298 
Rappaport,  Roy  A.,  155 
Rasmussen,  Knud,  78,  81,  83, 
84,  113,  305 

Rawlinson  ranges,  189,  190 
Ray,  Verne,  59,  65 
“Real  vs.  ideal,”  5 
Reay,  Marie,  179  n.,  197 
Refuge  areas,  a fallacy,  341,  342 
see  also  Marginality 
Reid,  Russell  M.,  332 
Reim,  Helmut,  202  n. 

Remo,  24,  25,  29 
Repulse  Bay,  83 
Residence  patterns: 
and  census  data,  103 
evolutionary  implications,  74 
mechanical  vs.  statistical 
models  of,  212-13 
methods  of  analysis,  103 
northern  vs.  tropical  tribes, 
69-72 

Pleistocene  implications,  74 
post-marital,  213,  269 
seasonal  changes,  69 
stability,  comparative,  69 
and  subsistence,  71-72 
typology,  69 

Retrieval  of  game,  309,  310,  311 
Reynolds,  Vernon,  330 
Richards,  Audrey  I.,  37,  109  n. 
Ridington,  Robin,  42  n. 

Rift  Valley,  16 
Rio  Negro,  25,  28 
Ritual,  study  of,  160 
Rivera,  63 

Riverine  adaptations,  23,  26, 
186,  189,  231 

Rodrigues,  Arion  D.,  Igna, 
28 

Rogers,  Edward  S.,  4 
Role  theory,  application,  160 
Romer’s  rule,  67 
Romney,  Kimball,  18 
Roney,  James  G.,  Jr.,  224 
Root  crops,  farming,  23,  27 
Rose,  Frederick  G.  G.,  4,  10,  17, 
141,  146,  148,  175,  177, 
179,  190,  195,  200,  202  n„ 
205,  206,  208,  209,  210, 


246,  331 

Roth,  H.  Ling,  17,  333 
Rouse,  Irving,  25,  27 
Rousefell,  George,  62 
Rowe,  John  Howland,  23 
Roy,  Sarat  Chandra,  149-50 
Royal  Anthropological  Society, 
49  n. 

Rue,  17 
Rules: 

formal,  146,  148-49 

kinship  and  terminology, 
166,  167 

marriage,  166-68 
jural,  9,  152 

residence,  and  domestic  cy- 
cles, 213 

Rutumayo-IcA  River,  25 
Rwanda,  16 

S 

Sackett,  J.  R„  267,  275,  287, 
288,  323,  334 

Sade,  Donald  S.,  300,  301,  343 
Sadlermiut  Eskimo,  242 
Sahaptin,  67 

Sahlins,  Marshall  D.,  4,  6,  36  n., 
85,  86,  87,  88,  89,  90,  91, 
95,  153,  155,  158,  171  n., 
199,  203,  204,  246,  263, 
272,  303,  325,  341 
Sakai,  17 

Salish,  58-59,  61  n.,  62,  63-64, 
65,  66,  67,  286 
Salteaux,  216 
Samuels,  Robert,  222 
Sanema,  19 
Santal,  130,  149 
Sanye,  16 
Sapir,  Edward,  215 
Sauer,  Carl  O.,  26,  27 
Sawyer,  Jack,  324 
Scavenging,  326,  342 
Schaller,  George  B.,  294,  297, 
318,  329,  330 
Schapera,  Isaac,  35,  332 
Schebesta,  Paul,  16,  17,  132,  333 
Schieffelin,  215 
Schitz,  C.  A.,  333 
Schmidt,  Max,  19 
Schneider,  David  M-,  186  n., 
341,  342,  350 

Section  systems,  see  Subsection 
systems 

Seligman,  Brenda  Z.,  17,  71 


Index  41 1 

Seligman,  Charles  G.,  17,  71 
Selvan  culture,  see  Tropical 
forest  culture 
Semang,  17,  70,  71,  75 
epidemiologic  studies,  221, 
227,  228 

parasite  species  numbers,  227 
Semenov,  S.  A.,  266 
Semon,  Richard,  176 
Sen,  B.  K.,  148 
Sen,  Jyoti,  148 
Senoi,  17 
Seri,  18,  270 

Service,  Elman  R.,  30,  115,  127, 
142,  146,  161,  179  n., 

185  n.,  198,  263,  264,  284, 
301,  332 

on  band  organization,  7,  8 
environment  and  social  level 
in  Southeast  Australia, 
139 

social  complexity  and  sodali- 
ties, 141,  144 

Sex: 

division  of  labor  by,  33,  51, 
64,  187,  296 
ratio,  159,  236,  243 
and  economics,  302 
Shack,  William  A.,  16 
Shapiro,  Harry  L.,  317 
Sharing,  of  food,  33,  35,  53,  66 
67,  85,  106-107 
vs.  hoarding,  94 
Sharp,  Lauriston,  4,  8,  17,  154, 
158,  161,  177  n„  187,  190, 
210,  215,  288,  289 
Shelter,  328 

Shimkin,  Dimitri  B.,  16 
Shipibo,  24,  25,  29 
Shiriana,  19,  42 
Shirokogorov,  S.  M.,  315 
Shoshoni,  7,  18,  95,  161-62,  230, 
232,  285 

food  surplus,  325 
history,  161 
neighbors,  162 
social  structure,  321-23 
bilaterality,  161 
marriage  ties,  332 
primary  bands,  331 
seasonal  moves  and,  161, 
331 

Shuswap,  18 
Siam,  see  Thailand 


Index 


412 

Siberian  hunters,  pastoralism, 
16 

Silberbauer,  G.  B.,  15,  35,  36, 
41  n.,  42  n. 

Simmons,  Leo  W.,  74 
Simpson,  George  Gaylord,  263, 
264,  293  n. 

Sinha,  Surajit,  4,  149-50 
Siriono,  4,  19,  24,  25,  26,  41  n., 
70,  281 

Sister  exchange,  130,  156,  211, 
212 

Skeena  River,  59,  65 
Slater,  Miriam  K.,  301 
Slave: 

Indians,  151 
raiding,  23,  24 
Slavery,  60  n. 

economic  importance  of,  65- 
66 

Slobodin,  Richard,  4,  150,  151, 
154,  209 

Small-scale  societies,  10-12 
East  African,  132-37 
Smith,  Adam,  85 
Snake  River,  162 
Snow,  Clyde,  312 
Social  organization,  7-9,  11-12, 
335-36 

and  acculturation,  7,  8,  9, 
128,  179-81,  234,  332-33 
bands,  see  Bands 
bilaterality,  9,  19,  113,  125, 
149,  151,  161 

. ...  . 1 . 11  r 1 

ccmipiCA.iiy , piuuicins  oi  cvai- 

uation,  139,  141-42 
corporations,  8-9 
descent,  138,  142,  145,  336 
division  of  labor,  154,  298- 
99,  335 

and  environment,  132-42, 
185,  321-23 

fluidity  of,  7,  8,  9,  107,  110, 
132,  133,  135-37,  153-55 
gerontocracy,  10,  141,  205, 
209 

of  hunting,  300-303 
of  IKung  Bushmen,  31 
leadership,  65,  105,  139,  140, 
143,  317,  345 

lineage  organization,  127, 
128,  129,  149-50 
local,  see  Local  organization 
and  mating  patterns,  126-31 
matriliny,  138,  142,  145,  332 


methodological  problems, 
158-61 
norms,  154 

of  Northwest  Coast  peoples, 
56 

patriliny,  93,  129,  130,  138, 
238,  332-33 

ritual  and  ideology,  160-61 
roles  vs.  society,  160 
social  units,  322,  331-33 
archeological  interpreta- 
tion, 266-67,  282,  284, 
334 

corporate,  vs.  special  pur- 
pose aggregation,  266, 
267,  272,  286,  287 
definition,  7,  159-60 
nuclear  family,  322,  330- 
31,  335 

prehistoric,  282-84 
and  subsistence,  64-67,  69-77, 
187-88,  321 

see  also  specific  tribe  names 
Society,  construct  of,  159-60 
Socrates,  166  n. 

Soils,  tropical  forest,  27 
Sollas,  William  J.,  253 
Solute,  231 
Sonora,  18 

Sorcery,  12,  59,  64,  91,  92,  341 
South  America: 

earliest  inhabitants,  25 
linguistic  stocks,  27-28,  29 
mythology,  284,  344,  345 
Soui'u  Ausuaiia,  138,  145,  183, 
190 

South  Bihar,  128 
Southeast  Asia,  345 
hunters,  17 

Southeast  Australia,  8,  138-45, 
189-90 

Southwest  (U.S.A.),  329 
Southwest  Africa,  30,  152 
Spencer,  Baldwin,  74,  89,  179, 
190,  205,  210 

Spencer,  Robert  F.,  73,  76,  111, 

112 

Spinifex  desert  areas,  186,  187 
Spirit  children,  204 
Spuhler,  J.  N.,  318 
Stalking  of  game,  308,  309 
Stanner,  W.  E.  H.,  99,  146,  147, 
148,  157,  162,  177  n„  179, 
187,  189,  190,  192,  210, 
234,  235 


Star  Carr,  249 

Starvation,  59,  82,  83,  84,  85, 
89,  223,  242,  344 
Stefansson,  Vilhjalmur,  112 
Sternberg,  Hilgard  O’Reilly, 
27,  28 

Steward,  Julian  H.,  5,  7,  12,  25, 
26,  27,  71,  72,  73,  74, 
76,  92,  127,  128,  161,  162, 
284,  321,  332,  333,  342,- 

343 

Stirling,  Sir  Edward  Charles, 
189 

Stone  Age: 
circumpolar,  69 
peoples,  present-day,  278 
Straits  languages,  58  n. 

Straits  of  Magellan,  25 
Strehlow,  Theodor  G.  H.,  147, 
148,  198,  202,  210,  211, 
233 

Strong,  William  D.,  333 
Struever,  Stuart,  92,  262,  286 
Struggle  for  existence,  84 
myth  of,  30 

Struhsaker,  Thomas,  342 
Sturtevant,  W.  C.,  15 
Style: 

dines,  first  appearance,  275 
and  demographic  inferences, 
260 

zones,  and  terminal  Pleisto- 
cene, 275 

Subarctic  tribes,  4,  69,  118-25 

SlJBSECIlOIN  SYSIEMS: 

classical  view  of,  177-79 
and  demography,  9-10,  1 79— 
84 

function  of,  188 
Gidjingali,  173-74 
influence  of  environment, 
185 

Subsistence,  6,  186-87,  282 
abundance,  30,  33-39,  56-68, 

344 

base,  6,  30,  46,  48,  282 
comparative  study,  41-48 
definitions,  41-42,  326 
Hadza,  50-55,  86,  259 
"hunters”  as  misnomer,  4,  43 
among  IKung  Bushmen,  30- 
41 

quantitative  measures  of, 
33-39 

and  latitude,  42,  43 


of  non-human  primates,  318, 
329 

Northwest  Coast,  58-64 
per  cent  of  success,  40,  52 
quantification  of  need,  94, 
324 

relative  productivity  of  hunt- 
ing vs.  gathering,  7,  33, 
40,  42-43,  51,  78,  92 
reliability  of,  30,  42 
and  residence  patterns,  69-72 
and  scarcity,  58-59,  60,  64, 
78-82,  344 

and  severity  of  winter,  42  n. 
and  social  organization,  64- 
67,  69-77,  87-88,  .321 
time  spent  in  food  quest,  36- 
37,  54,  86 
Sudan,  132,  245 
Sue,  Hiroko,  216 
Sumatra,  17 
Survivals,  149,  253 
Suttles,  Wayne,  4,  12,  42,  56, 
58,  66,  85,  90,  154,  286 
Swan,  James  G.,  59,  64 
Swan  River,  189 
Sweeney,  G.,  187 
Sydney,  190 

T 

Tanana,  Upper,  73 
Tanzania,  50  n.,  332 
Tarahumara,  312 
Tasmanians,  17,  253,  333 
Tasmania,  190,  205 
Tatoga,  157 
Taylor,  Clara  M.,  39 
Taylor,  Garth  J„  111,  112,  186 
Taylor,  Herbert  C.,  56 
Tax,  Sol,  vii,  viii,  271,  303,  345, 
346 

Technology: 

and  child  rearing,  307 
and  culture,  324-28 
evolution  of: 

facilities  and  implements, 
272 

relation  to  mortuary  prac- 
tices, 272,  273 
use  of  water  resources,  294 
food  storage  and  preserva- 
tion techniques,  90,  328 
Mesolithic  advances,  7,  272, 
273,  294,  296 
and  northern  hunters,  12 


and  population  density,  247 
selection  and  symmetrical 
tools,  298 

simplicity  of,  313,  314 
subsistence,  link  between 
archeology  and  ethnog- 
raphy, 345 
tool,  279 

transportational  devices,  327 
Tehuacan  valley,  95 
Tehuacanos,  90,  95 
Tepes,  133 

Territorial  associations,  Aus- 
tralian aborigines,  100, 
146-47,  154,  156-57,  191, 
199 

Territorial  resources,  8-9 
Territoriality,  147-48,  154 
boundaries,  100,  156-58 
and  ecological  zones,  157, 
188 

poaching,  135 
trespass,  100,  135,  157 
and  food  resources,  126-27 
and  hunter-gatherers,  31,  50- 
51,  93,  100,  104-105,  128, 
130,  147,  148,  154,  333- 
34,  340,  349 
local  group,  235 
and  non-human  primates, 
100,  244,  329-30 
importance  of  context,  245 
and  patrilocality,  129 
in  population  regulation, 
222 

and  rainfall,  188 
rights,  202 

and  marriage,  208 
and  ritual  sites,  12 
and  war,  24-25 
Territory: 

and  conflict  resolution,  340 
disputed,  147 

and  food  resources,  100,  126 
Terryhaihai,  143 
Teuso,  16,  133 
see  also  Ik 
Teuth,  see  Ik 
Thailand,  17,  159 
Thalbitzer,  William,  111 
Thomas,  Northcote  W.,  179 
Thomas,  Vital,  123,  124 
Thomas,  William,  139,  140 
Thompson,  Raymond  H.,  269 


Index  413 

Thomson,  Donald  F.,  190,  205, 
258 

Tierra  del  Fuego,  19,  93,  312, 
327 

Tikerarmiut,  76 
Tiqui£  River,  25 
Tindale,  Norman  B.,  8,  139, 
142,  144,  145,  147,  148, 
186,  187,  188,  190,  194, 
198,  202  n.,  230,  231,  234, 
235,  236,  237,  246 
Tindiga,  see  Hadza 
Tiwi,  4,  17,  154,  205 
headmen,  141 
land  use,  156-57 
sodalities,  141-42,  144 
warfare,  158 
Tksiaktorvik,  84 
Tlingit,  65,  67 
Toba,  19 

Tobias,  Phillip  V.,  15 
Tokapchi  River,  71 
Tokarev,  S.  A.,  203 
Tolowa,  59-60,  61  n.,  64,  66,  67 
Thom  Bay,  83,  84 
Tonkawa,  18 
Tonnika,  72 
T ools: 

evolutionary  significance  of, 
318 

and  hunting  methods,  326 
of  Mesolithic  era,  294 
and  technology,  279,  398 
typologies,  274 
Treganza,  A.  E.,  271 
Treide,  Dietrich,  64 
Tretyakov,  P.  N.,  269 
Torralba,  248,  255 
Totemic  descent  groups,  7-8, 
141-42,  143,  144,  148, 
150 

Totemic  sites,  157 
Trade: 

Birhor,  128 
Hadza-Bantu,  50 
honey,  52 

monopolies,  on  Northwest 
Coast,  67 

Transportation  of  foods,  327 
Transportational  devices,  327 
Trash-deposition  rates,  283 
Trespass,  100,  135,  157 
Tribal  societies,  131 
Tribal  units,  genetic  units  as, 
315-16 


414  Index 

Tribe: 

as  biological  entity,  188,  237, 
246 

boundaries  of,  188,  199  n. 
dialectical,  229-34,  245-46, 
333 

and  language,  246 
models,  126-31,  229-39 
size,  11,  245-48,  333 
and  language,  231-34 
magic  numbers,  230,  232, 
245,  247 

Pleistocene  estimates,  233, 
239 

and  subsection  systems,  181 
usage  of  term,  113,  118,  142, 
187-88,  202,  246 
Trobriands,  171 
Tropical  forest  culture,  23 
cultural  development,  27-28 
diagnostic  traits,  26 
ecosystem,  26 
soil,  27 

Tropical  rainforest,  226 
'I'simshian,  59,  63,  65,  66 
Tswana,  15,  31,  40,  157 
'Tucker,  A.  N.,  49 
Tucano,  see  Tukuna 
Tucanoan  tribes,  see  Tukuna 
Tukuna,  24-25,  29 
Tungus,  315 

Tupi-Guarani  linguistic  stock, 
27-28,  29 

Turishcainyo,  early  ceramic 

1 . n« 

aiyic, 

Turkana,  133 

Turnbull,  Colin,  4,  8,  9,  16,  50, 
74,  85,  91,  92,  132,  154, 
155,  156,  161,  223,  224, 
225,  235,  245,  279,  288, 
340,  341,  344 
Tusayan  area,  162 
Tushipet  Valley,  72 
Twana,  61 

U 

Uanana,  25 
Ucayali  River,  27 
Uganda,  132,  245,  295,  345 
Umiaks,  92,  327 
Unalaska,  315 
Underwood,  E.  J.,  186 
UNESCO,  249 

United  Nations,  World  Food 
Program,  39-40 


Utah,  332 
Uttar  Pradesh,  16 

V 

Vallois,  Henri  V.,  77,  301 
Vancouver  Island,  59 
Van  de  Velde,  Frans,  81,  113 
Van  Stone,  James  W.,  Ill 
Vayda,  Andrew  P.,  28,  67 
Veddas,  4,  16-17,  70,  71,  336 
Veddoid  hunters,  16-17 
Vegetable  food,  proportion  in 
diet,  33,  34,  40,  51,  61  n„ 
135,  186-87,  223 
Vegetation,  complexity  and  di- 
versity indexes,  226 
Velder,  C.  M.,  17 
Vellard,  J.,  19 
Venezuela,  19,  26,  27 
Veniaminov,  Bishop,  242 
Vertesszollos,  288 
Vettuvan,  16 

Victoria  (Australia),  138,  139, 
140,  141,  186,  189,  190 
Victoria,  B.  C„  63 
Vietnam,  17 
Voltaic  tribes,  215 
von  Lawick,  Hugo,  342,  343 
Vorkapich,  Myra,  230 

W 

Wagner,  Philip  L.,  272 
Wailwun,  140 

Wakashan  (Nootka  and  Kwa- 
kiuti),  65,  66 

Walbiri,  4,  41,  99,  100,  180, 
181  n.,  187,  188,  190,  194, 
197.  206,  233,  234,  245 
Wallace,  190 
Walmadjari,  233 
Wampanoag,  281 
War: 

captives,  disposal  of,  25 
definition,  158 
demographic  effects,  28,  158 
and  hunting,  299-300 
and  male  cooperation,  296 
rare  among  hunters,  333-34 
Tiwi:  description,  157-58 
Warner,  W.  Lloyd,  86,  165,  179, 
192,  210 
Warrau,  18-19 

Washburn,  Sherwood  L.,  7,  74, 
84,  93,  244,  245,  247, 
254,  260,  285,  293,  298, 


318,  319,  330,  340,  341, 
342,  343,  344 

Watanabe,  Hitoshi,  4,  6,  42  n., 
69,  72,  73,  74,  75,  76,  111, 
147,  154,  235,  272,  345 
Water: 

as  barrier  to  primitive  man, 
294 

sources  of,  50 

in  Australian  desert,  1 86— 
87 

transportation,  327 
Watson,  Patty  Jo,  270 
Watt,  Bernice  K.,  33 
Wayland,  E.  J„  133 
Wealth,  67 

Weapons,  and  division  of  labor, 
74 

Webb,  R.  C„  227 
Webb,  T.  Theodor,  189 
Weinberg,  D.,  67 
Wenner-Gren  Foundation  for 
Anthropological  Re- 
search, 39  n.,  49  n„  261 
Western  Australia,  186,  189, 
190,  233 

Westphal,  E.  O.  J.,  49 
Whallon,  Robert,  263,  270 
Wharton,  R.  H.,  et  al.,  228 
Wheeler,  David  E.,  189 
Wheeler,  G.  C„  335 
White,  Leslie  A.,  262 
Whiting,  Beatrice  B.,  337 
Whiting,  John  W.  M.,  viii,  209, 
21U,  214,  215,  249,  253, 
303,  336,  337,  339 
Whiton,  Louis  C.,  25 
Wilbert,  Johannes,  18,  19 
Wilby,  G.  V„  62 
Williams,  B.  J„  4,  6,  8,  16,  85, 
89,  126,  129,  146,  148, 
149,  150,  154,  155,  235, 
244,  247,  271,  332,  333, 
341,  343 

Wilson,  H.  Clyde,  185  n. 
Winter,  Edward  H.,  107 
Wiradjuri,  139,  142,  232 
hereditary  chiefs,  144 
powerful  headmen,  143-44 
inatrilineal  descent,  145 
sodalities,  144 
Wissler,  Clark,  313 
Witchcraft,  lack  of,  91,  92,  341 
Wittfogel,  Karl,  323 
Wolf,  Eric  R.,  185  n. 


Wolmeri,  198 

Woodburn,  James,  4,  6,  9, 
16,42  n.,  49,  67n.,89,  91, 
103,  104n,  108a.,  148, 

149,  150,  151-152,  154, 
155,  156,  157-158,  209, 
223,  243,  244,  258,  259, 
260,  279,  286,  300,  324, 
332,  337,  342,  345 
Worgaibon,  232 

World  Health  Organization, 
49  n„  221,  224,  225 
Wright,  Sewall,  237,  238,  316 
Wynne-Edwards,  equation  of 


recruitment  and  loss, 
222-23 

X 

Xavante  Indians,  221,  317 
Y 

Yahgan,  19 
Yaida,  104 

Yamada,  Munemi,  300 
Yanadi,  149 
Yellowknife,  76 
Yengoyan,  Aram  A.,  vii,  4,  10, 
17,  185,  260 


Index  415 

Yenisei  Ostyak,  16 
Yir  Yoront,  159,  187,  190 
Young,  R.  B.,  58 
Young,  William  C.,  340 
Yuin,  143 

Yukaghir,  16,  42,  70,  73,  77 

Yukon,  73 

Yumina,  25 

Yumans,  18,  89 

Yumbri,  17 

Yurok,  60  n.,  64,  66 

Z 

Zeuner,  F.  E.,  294 
Zuckermann,  Solly,  74 


Related  Titles  from  Aldine: 


STONE  AGE  ECONOMICS 


Marshall  Sahlins 

Addresses  the  nature  and  appropriate  analysis  of  economic  life  by  providing  detailed 
and  related  studies  of  tribal  economics;  describes  domestic  production  and  how  the 
demands  of  larger  society  affect  change. 


EARLY  HOMiNID  ACTIVITIES  AT  OLDUVAI 


r Richard  Potts 

Based  on  his  study  of  Olduvai  excavations,  Dr.  Potts  guides  the  reader  through  diverse 
aspects  of  site  interpretation  using  clues  from  geology,  stone  tools,  bones,  and  modern 
environment  in  order  to  reconstruct  the  taphonomic  events  and  hominid  activities. 
Conventional  assumptions  and  views  are  carefully  examined,  and  new  interpretive 
perspectives  are  offered  with  important  implications  for  our  understanding  of  hominid 
social  behavior  and  evolution. 


PREHISTORIC  AMERICA 

An  Ecological  Perspective 


Betty  J.  Meggers 

Outlines  New  World  cultural  development  within  an  ecological  framework,  and  shows  that 
parallels  in  cultural  development  in  North  and  South  America  result  from  parallel  adapta- 
tions to  the  environment. 


HUMAN  EVOLUTION 

An  Introduction  to  Man's  Adaptations 


(Third  Edition) 

Bernard  Campbell 


The  latest  edition  of  this  classic  textbook  contains  an  expanded  fossil  history  of  human 
evolution,  new  sections  on  human  variability  and  speciation,  primate  locomotion,  nonver- 
bal communication  and  the  evolution  of  language. 


PRIMATE  EVOLUTION  AND  HUMAN  ORIGINS 


Edited  by  Russell  L.  Ciochon  and  John  G.  Fleagle 


. . covers  the  whole  range  of  the  primate  order ...  a very  interesting  and  salutary 
package  ...  it  is  valuable  to  have  such  classic  articles  in  one  easily  accessible  place  ..." 

— Nature 


ALDINE  DE  GRUYTER 

200  Saw  Mill  River  Road  Hawthorne,  NY  10532 


ISBN  0-202-33032-X 


